PREAMBLE
We, the people of the free and sovereign State of New Columbia, seek to secure and provide for
each person: health, safety and welfare; a peaceful and orderly life; and the right to legal, social,
and economic justice and equality.
We recognize our unique and special history and the diversity and pluralism of our people, and
we have determined to control our collective destiny, maximize our individual freedom, and
govern ourselves democratically, guaranteeing to each individual and the people collectively,
complete and equal exercise and protection of the rights listed herein.
We reach out to all the peoples of the world in a spirit of friendship and cooperation, certain that
together we can build a future of peace and harmony.
Therefore, being mindful that government exists to serve every person, we do adopt this
Constitution and establish this government.
ARTICLE I.
BILL OF RIGHTS
Section 1. Freedom of Association, Assembly, Expression, and Petition. Freedom of
association, assembly, press, speech, and other forms of expression, and petition for redress of
grievances shall not be abridged.
Section 2. Freedom of Religion. The State shall establish no religion nor interfere with the free
exercise thereof. No person shall be denied any right or privilege because of religious belief or
the exercise thereof.
Section 3. Freedom from Discrimination. Every person shall have a fundamental right to the
equal protection of the law and to be free from historic group discrimination, public or private,
based on race, color, religion, creed, citizenship, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, poverty,
or parentage. Affirmative action to correct consequences of past discrimination against women,
and against racial and national minorities, shall be lawful.
Persons with disabilities shall have the right to be treated as equal community members and the
right to services as defined by law provided in a way that promotes dignity and independence
and full community participation.
Youth and seniors shall have the right to the enjoyment of health and well-being and to the
services as provided by law necessary for their development and welfare. No adult shall be
discriminated against in housing or employment on the basis of age, except that services limited
to senior citizens may be provided.
It shall be unlawful to commit or incite acts of violence against persons or property based on
race, color, religion, creed, national origin, sex, or sexual orientation.

Equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged in the State or any of its
subdivisions because of sex.
This section shall be self-executing and shall be enforced by appropriate legislation.
Section 4. Privacy. The right of the individual to decide whether to procreate or to bear a child is
inviolable, as is the right to noncommercial private, consensual, sexual behavior of adults. Those
who exercise or advocate these rights have, in addition, the right to be free from all forms of
discrimination.
Political surveillance is contrary to democratic principles. Therefore, unless relevant for
prosecution of past, present, or imminent crime, information on any person's exercise of freedom
of religion, expression, association, assembly, or petition for redress of grievances, shall not be
collected surreptitiously under color of law.
Individual privacy with respect to personal bank accounts, health, academic, employment,
communications, and similar records, the disclosure of which would constitute an invasion of the
privacy of the individual concerned, is a right, the protection of which shall be provided by law.
However, the name, salary, and place of employment of each employee of the State and of any of
its agencies or local government units is a matter of public record and shall be available to the
public.
Section 5. Due Process. The State shall not deprive any person of life, liberty, or property
without due process of law. The right of all persons to fair and just treatment in the course of
legislative and executive investigations shall not be abridged.
Section 6. Searches and Seizures. Privacy is a fundamental right. Therefore, the people shall be
free from unreasonable searches and seizures of their persons, homes, businesses, vehicles,
papers, and effects. This right extends to all places and for all circumstances in which the
individual has a reasonable expectation of privacy. The fruits of unlawful intrusions, including
intrusions by private persons, shall not be used by the State for any purpose in any judicial or
administrative proceeding against any individual, whether or not the individual was the target of
an unlawful search or seizure, and whether or not the expectation of privacy of that individual
was violated.
No search will ensue except under the authority of a valid warrant issued by a judicial officer;
such warrant shall be issued only upon probable cause and must be supported by oath or
affirmation describing with particularity the place to be searched and the persons or items to be
seized. This Section does not preclude warrantless searches or seizures in the following
circumstances: searches incident to a valid arrest; exigent circumstances under which officials
conducting the search or seizure have no time to secure a warrant; inadvertent discovery of
illegal material pursuant to the execution of a valid search warrant; searches and seizures
conducted at international borders or their functional equivalent; administrative searches of
pervasively regulated businesses pursuant to a general plan; and searches upon the consent of the
individual who is the subject of the search or seizure, provided that the individual had been fully

informed of the right to withhold consent, and no other exception to this Section is present. The
official conducting the search bears the burden of proving fully informed consent.
The right to be secure against unreasonable interception of telephonic, telegraphic, electronic,
and other forms of communication and against unreasonable interception of oral and other
communications by electronic methods shall not be violated. No such interception shall occur
except following issuance of a warrant. No orders or warrants for such interceptions shall be
issued but upon probable cause supported by oath or affirmation that evidence of crime may be
thus obtained, and particularly identifying the means of communication and the person or
persons whose communications are to be intercepted. Evidence obtained in violation of this
paragraph shall not be admissible in any court against any person.
Section 7. Rights of Arrestees and Defendants. In all criminal matters, all persons have the
right to the assistance of competent counsel from commencement of a custodial interrogation,
during trial and appeal, and whenever they are subject to a deprivation of liberty. When arrested
they shall be informed of their right to consult with counsel. Persons charged with a crime have
the right to receive an explicit statement of the nature and cause of the accusation, to the
discovery of all evidence possessed by the State, and to the presumption of innocence until
proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Convicted persons shall have the right to judicial
review.
Section 8. Grand Jury. All persons have the right to be free from unwarranted or arbitrary
prosecutions. The grand jury shall not engage in fishing expeditions. Grand jury indictments are
required for all offenses carrying authorized prison sentences of one year or more. Grand jurors
shall be drawn from a cross-section of the community. All grand jury witnesses shall have the
right to assistance and presence of counsel, to be informed of the privilege against selfincrimination, and to be advised if they are, or may become, targets of prosecution. Criminal
defendants are entitled to grand jury transcripts in a timely fashion.
The grand jury shall appoint and the State shall pay non-governmental counsel for independent
advice. Indictments shall be issued only on probable cause and shall, upon motion, be dismissed
for violations of this Section.
The House of Delegates shall determine the manner of grand jury selection and operation.
Section 9. Bail. The sole purpose of bail is to assure the presence of the accused at trial. Bail
shall not be excessive and may take the form of a cash or property guarantee.
Section 10. Trial by Jury. Every person accused of a criminal offense is guaranteed the right to:
a speedy, public, and fair trial; compulsory attendance of witnesses; confrontation with adversary
witnesses; and trial by a jury of 12 persons. Conviction may be based only upon a unanimous
jury verdict finding the accused guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
Section 11. Punishment. The State shall not require excessive fines, nor impose cruel, corporal,
or unusual punishment, or sentence of death. Penal administration shall be based upon the
principle of reformation with the objective of restoring the offender to a useful role in

community life. Convicted persons shall not be denied any rights specified in this Constitution
except as shall be reasonably necessary for the security of a penal institution or the State and its
citizens.
Section 12. Imprisonment for Debt. No person shall be imprisoned for inability to pay a debt.
Section 13. Double Jeopardy. No person shall be tried more than once for the same offense;
further, the State shall try in a single trial all charges, actual and potential, arising from the same
facts and circumstances. Trial of a person for an offense in any jurisdiction of the United States
and subsequent trial under the jurisdiction of the State for the same offense based on the same set
of facts and circumstances shall constitute double jeopardy under this Section.
Section 14. Bills of Attainder and Ex Post Facto Laws. Bills of attainder and ex post facto
laws are prohibited.
Section 15. Habeas Corpus. The writ of habeas corpus shall be available promptly at all times,
successively, and without limit in all cases of unlawful detention, conviction, or sentencing,
whether or not the petitioner is in custody.
Section 16. Abolition of Common Law Criminal Offenses. Every crime shall be defined with
specificity in a statute enacted by the House of Delegates, and no person shall be accused,
arrested, tried, or convicted for any act not expressly defined as an offense by such statute. This
Section shall take effect after the expiration of a time period to be specified by law.
Section 17. Abolition of Sovereign Immunity. Unless otherwise provided in this Constitution,
the State and any of its subordinate levels of government, and any branch, agency and office
thereof, and any officer or agent thereof in both official and personal capacity, shall be amenable
to suit and liability in the courts of this State or of the United States, with respect to official acts
both of commission and omission, including the failure, inability, or refusal by law enforcement
agencies of the State to provide reasonable protection to individuals from crimes of violence;
except that, no judge of any court may be sued with respect to a decision rendered in any case,
but may be questioned and required to testify as to issuance of any warrant.
Section 18. Slavery and Involuntary Servitude. Slavery and involuntary servitude are
prohibited.
Section 19. Civil Suits. The right to a jury trial in a civil suit shall remain inviolate. The House
of Delegates shall assure access to courts for those litigants unable to pay. Court costs shall not
be required of any litigant unable to pay.
Section 20. Right to Employment. Every person shall have the right to employment, or if
unable to work, an income sufficient to meet basic human needs.
Section 21. Equal Pay. All employees shall be guaranteed equal pay for equal work and equal
pay for comparable work.

Section 22. The Right to Change. The State with its institutions belongs to the people who
inhabit it. Whenever a government fails to serve its people, they may exercise their inalienable
right to alter, reform, or abolish it.
Section 23. Unenumerated Rights. The enumeration in this Constitution of certain rights
possessed by the individual or limitations upon the government shall not be construed to
disparage nor deny other rights or limitations not enumerated.
Section 24. Self-Execution. All Sections of this Article shall be self-executing.
ARTICLE II.
THE LEGISLATIVE BRANCH
Section 1. Legislative Power. The legislative power of the State shall be vested in the
legislature, which shall be called the House of Delegates.
Section 2. Composition of the House of Delegates. The House of Delegates shall have one
chamber composed of 40 members who are elected from single-member legislative districts. By
majority vote of the Delegates present and voting, the House of Delegates shall elect a President
from among its members.
Section 3. Qualifications of Members. A candidate for the House of Delegates must be a
citizen of the United States. To become a Delegate, a candidate must receive the highest number
of votes on the designated day of election from the qualified voters of the legislative district.
A Delegate must be at least 18 years old, a resident of the State for at least three years, a resident
of the legislative district for at least 18 months, and a registered voter of that district. Every
Delegate must reside in the legislative district while in office.
Section 4. Disqualifications. While in office, no appointed or elected Delegate may hold any
other federal or state elected or appointed public office, position of profit, or employment.
During the term of office, no member shall be elected or appointed to any public office or
employment which shall have been created, or the salary or benefits of which shall have been
increased, by legislative act during such term. This Section does not apply to Delegates seeking
re-election, or election to a constitutional convention.
Section 5. Term in Office. A Delegate shall be elected for a four-year term.
Section 6. Time of Election. In general elections, half the Delegates will be elected in every
even-numbered year. Following their election, winning candidates shall assume office on the
second Monday of January.
Section 7. Vacancies. Legislative vacancies shall be filled as provided by law.
Section 8. Compensation of Members. The members of the House of Delegates shall receive
annual salaries and such allowances as may be prescribed by law. However, any increase or

decrease in salary or allowances shall not apply to a Delegate serving in the House of Delegates
which enacted the increase or decrease until the re-election of that Delegate.
The Governor shall appoint, subject to the advice and consent of the House of Delegates,
members of a five-member commission. Every four years, this commission shall report to the
public the level of legislative compensation that is appropriate, taking into account comparable
compensation in the public and private sectors. The members of the commission shall hold no
other public office. Procedures for the establishment and operation of the commission shall be
established by law.
Section 9. Sessions. The House of Delegates shall be a continuing body during the term for
which Delegates are elected; however, all unapproved pending bills shall expire automatically on
the second Monday in January of each odd-numbered year. The House of Delegates shall meet in
regular sessions annually, as provided by law. It may also be convened by the Governor, subject
to the conditions of Article III, or by the President of the House of Delegates at the written
request of a majority of all Delegates.
Adequate advance notice of all meetings of the House of Delegates and of its committees shall
be published. The notice shall include the agenda. All meetings of the House of Delegates and of
its committees shall be open to the public, to the press, and to radio and television coverage.
However, meetings involving confidential discussions of specific staff personnel may be closed
by a two-thirds vote of the House of Delegates or the committee.
Section 10. Organization and Procedure. The courts shall be the final judge of the election and
qualifications of Delegates. The House of Delegates shall prescribe its rules of procedure which
shall be consistent with this Constitution. It may compel the attendance of absent members,
discipline its members, and, with the concurrence of two-thirds of all members, expel a member
for cause. It shall have power to compel the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of books and papers either before the House of Delegates as a whole or before any of
its committees.
Section 11. Legislative Immunity. For any speech or debate in the House of Delegates,
Delegates shall not be questioned in any other place.
Section 12. Transaction of Business. A majority of all Delegates shall constitute a quorum to
do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day and compel the attendance of
absent members. The House of Delegates and its committees shall keep journals of proceedings.
Each journal shall be available to the public and shall also be promptly published. The journal
shall contain all motions made and the votes on those motions. A record vote, with the yeas and
nays entered into the journal, shall be taken in the House of Delegates on any vote deciding final
passage or defeat of a bill, on any vote to defer consideration of a question indefinitely, and on
any vote on the demand of four members. In committee, upon demand of any member, or on any
vote deciding final approval of a report, the yeas and nays shall be recorded and entered into the
journal.

A verbatim or electronically produced record of proceedings of the House of Delegates and of
standing committees shall be made available to the public on request.
Section 13. Committees. The House of Delegates may establish committees necessary for the
conduct of its business.
Section 14. Bills. The House of Delegates shall enact no law except by bill. The subject of every
law shall be clearly expressed in its title. Each law shall have an enacting clause as follows: "Be
it enacted by the people of the State of New Columbia." No bill embracing more than one subject
shall be passed except appropriation bills which shall include only appropriations and bills for
the codification or revision of the laws. All laws shall be published. Whenever a law or section
of law is amended, it shall be re-enacted and republished. Every law shall be plainly worded.
Section 15. Passage of Bills. No bill shall become law unless
(a) a majority of the entire House of Delegates has approved it in identical form on two
occasions at least 13 calendar days apart and the bill had been printed and distributed at least
three calendar days in advance on both occasions; or
(b) the Governor has certified that prompt passage, precluding a time lapse of 13 days, is
essential, and a majority of all Delegates approve the bill.
Section 16. Approval or Veto. All bills approved by the House of Delegates, except those
relating solely to legislative procedure, shall be presented to the Governor for signature or for
veto. The Governor may, by veto, strike items in appropriation bills. The Governor shall veto
other bills only as a whole. The Governor shall promptly return any vetoed bill or item of
appropriation to the House of Delegates with a statement of objections. A bill shall become law
if the Governor either signs it or does not veto it within 15 days of presentation.
Section 17. Legislative Action Upon Veto. Upon receipt of a veto, the House of Delegates shall
promptly reconsider passage of the vetoed bill or appropriation item. Such a bill or item requires
only one reading. A vetoed bill shall become law by the affirmative votes of two-thirds of all
Delegates, except that a veto of an appropriation bill or item shall be overridden by the
affirmative votes of two-thirds of the Delegates present and voting.
If the House of Delegates is not in session when a bill or item is vetoed, the House of Delegates
may consider the bill or item at its next regular or special session.
Section 18. Effective Date of Laws. No law shall take effect earlier than 90 days after
enactment except laws declared to be emergency laws and laws which under this Constitution are
not subject to referendum. An emergency law shall contain a preamble setting forth the facts
constituting the emergency and a statement that the law is necessary for the immediate
preservation of the public peace, health, safety, or convenience. A separate recorded vote shall be
taken on the preamble, and unless the preamble is adopted by two-thirds of the members of the
House of Delegates present and voting, the law shall not be an emergency law.
Section 19. Auditor. The House of Delegates shall appoint an auditor to serve for six years or
until a successor has been appointed. By a two-thirds vote of all Delegates, the House of

Delegates at any time may remove the auditor from office for cause. Each year the auditor shall
conduct a thorough audit of all State government accounts and operations and shall submit these
audit reports to the Governor and to the House of Delegates. The House of Delegates shall make
available these reports and distribute summaries to the public.
Section 20. Impeachment. Any executive official elected or appointed with legislative consent
is subject to legislative impeachment for cause as may be provided by law.
Impeachment shall originate in the House of Delegates and must be approved by the affirmative
votes of two-thirds of all Delegates.
The motion for impeachment shall state the reasons for the proceeding.
Trial on impeachment shall be conducted by the House of Delegates in accordance with
procedures provided by law. A Justice of the Supreme Court shall preside at the trial.
Conviction requires the affirmative votes of two-thirds of all Delegates.
The judgment on conviction may not extend beyond removal from office and disqualification to
hold and enjoy any state office of honor, trust, or profit but shall not prevent proceedings in the
courts on the same or related charges.
Section 21. Code of Ethics. The House of Delegates shall enact conflict-of-interest legislation
which shall apply to all elected and appointed State and local candidates for and officials in the
executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government. The conflict-of-interest legislation
shall include, but not be limited to, requirements for mandatory annual disclosure by public
officials of economic interests and sources of income. A Delegate who has personal or private
interests, as defined by law, in any proposed or pending bill, shall disclose this fact to the
presiding officer and shall not vote on that bill.
ARTICLE III
THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH
Section 1. Executive Power Vested in the Governor. The executive power of the State shall be
vested in the Governor, who shall be responsible for the faithful execution of the laws.
Section 2. The Lieutenant Governor. There shall be an elected Lieutenant Governor whose
primary duties shall be prescribed by law.
The Lieutenant Governor shall serve as Governor during any period of gubernatorial disability as
determined by the Supreme Court. The Lieutenant Governor shall exercise only those
administrative duties necessary for the continued and efficient functioning of the State until the
Governor either resumes office or is replaced in a special election.
Section 3. The Attorney General. There shall be an Attorney General appointed by the
Governor, with the advice and consent of the House of Delegates, for a term of four years. The

Attorney General shall be the chief legal officer of the State and shall have responsibility for
advising the Governor on legal questions, prosecuting offenders, and representing the State in all
legal matters.
Section 4. Election of Governor and Lieutenant Governor. (A) Election The Governor and
the Lieutenant Governor shall be elected by direct popular vote at the regular elections in
Presidential election years. Their term shall be four years, beginning on the second day of
January following their election.
(B) Voting Candidates for Governor and Lieutenant Governor shall run in pairs for whom a
single vote shall be cast. The pair of candidates having the highest number of votes shall be
elected Governor and Lieutenant Governor. In case of a tie between two or more pairs of
candidates, a runoff election shall be held.
(C) Re-election A person who has served two consecutive terms of office as Governor or as
Lieutenant Governor shall be ineligible for re-election to the same office for the term
immediately following.
(D) Qualifications The Governor and the Lieutenant Governor must be at least 30 years old upon
assumption of office, citizens of the United States, and residents of the State for at least five
years. They shall hold no other public office or regular employment.
Section 5. Powers of the Governor. (A) Administration The Governor shall control the
administration of the Executive Branch. With the advice and consent of the House of Delegates,
the Governor shall appoint the heads of all principal departments, and administrative offices and
agencies whose appointment or election is not otherwise provided. The Governor may at any
time require information, in writing or otherwise, from the officers of any administrative
department, office, or agency concerning any subject relating to their offices. The Governor may
remove any gubernatorially appointed official of the Executive Branch.
(B) Commander-in-Chief The Governor shall be Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces of the
State, and may call out such forces to execute the laws.
(C) Executive Clemency The Governor shall have power to grant reprieves, commutations, and
pardons, after conviction, for all offenses, subject to such procedures as may be prescribed by
law. A parole system shall be provided by law.
(D) Legislative Power On extraordinary occasions, the Governor may convene the House of
Delegates by a proclamation which shall state the purposes for which the session is convened.
When so convened, the House of Delegates shall not legislate on any subject not specified in the
proclamation, except to provide for the expenses of the session and other incidental matters. The
Governor may convene the House of Delegates at some other place if the security of the seat of
government is threatened.

The Governor shall present a message to the House of Delegates at the beginning of each
session. At other times the Governor may inform the House of Delegates of the affairs of the
State and may submit legislative recommendations.
(E) Judicial Powers The Governor shall appoint Justices and Judges as provided for in this
Constitution.
Section 6. Budget. At a time fixed by law, the Governor shall submit to the House of Delegates
a budget for the next fiscal period.
Section 7. Principal Departments. (A) Limitation All offices and agencies of the Executive
Branch shall be allocated by law among not more than 20 principal departments which shall be
grouped as far as practicable according to major purposes. For this limitation the offices of
Governor, Lieutenant Governor, Attorney General, and the governing bodies of institutions of
higher education provided for in this Constitution shall not be counted.
(B) Reorganization The Governor may make changes in the organization of the Executive
Branch or in the assignment of functions among its units in order to improve the administration
of government. If such changes require amendments to existing law, they shall be set forth in
Executive Orders, which shall be submitted to the House of Delegates at least 60 days before the
end of the regular session, shall have the force of law, and shall become effective 60 days after
submission, unless specifically modified or disapproved by a resolution concurred in by a
majority of all the members of the House of Delegates.
Section 8. Boards and Commissions. (A) Appointments With the advice and consent of the
House of Delegates, the Governor may appoint members of boards and commissions. The terms
of office and procedures for removal of such members shall be as prescribed by this Constitution
or by law.
(B) Establishment Boards and commissions may be established by law unless otherwise provided
in this Constitution.
(C) Membership Not all members of any board or commission shall be members of the same
political party.
Section 9. Advice and Consent to Appointments. An appointment subject to the advice and
consent of the House of Delegates requires a majority vote of all members of the House of
Delegates.
Section 10. Vacancies. (A) State Officials The Governor may make an interim appointment to
fill a vacancy occasioned by the death, resignation, suspension, or removal of an appointed or
elected officer, other than a legislative or judicial officer, until the officer is reinstated or the
vacancy is filled in the manner prescribed by law or this Constitution. A person whose
appointment to an office has been disapproved by the House of Delegates, shall not be eligible
for an interim appointment to that office.

(B) United States Senators In the event of a vacancy in the office of United States Senator of
Senator-elect, the Governor may appoint a person who possesses the necessary qualifications to
hold the office until the next regularly-scheduled general election at which the vacancy can
practicably be filled or the expiration of the term, whichever is sooner.
(C) Implementation The House of Delegates shall implement this Section by appropriate
legislation.
Section 11. Compensation. The Governor and the Lieutenant Governor shall each receive the
compensation provided by law in full payment for all services performed and expenses incurred
during their terms of office. Such compensation shall not be diminished during the term of
office.
Section 12. Executive Residence. A suitably furnished executive residence may be provided
within the State for the use of the Governor. The Governor shall receive an allowance for its
maintenance as provided by law.
Section 13. Succession to the Governorship. (A) Governor If the Governor dies, resigns, is
removed from office, or is determined by the Supreme Court to be permanently disabled, the
Lieutenant Governor and other persons in a sequence prescribed by law shall become Governor
for the remainder of the term of the Governor.
(B) Governor-elect If the Governor-elect dies, or is determined by the Supreme Court to be
permanently disabled, the Lieutenant Governor-elect, and other persons in a sequence prescribed
by law shall become Governor at the commencement of the term of the Governor-elect.
Section 14. Great Seal. There shall be a Great Seal of the State, which shall be kept and used
officially by the Lieutenant Governor as prescribed by law.
ARTICLE IV.
THE JUDICIAL BRANCH
Section 1. Judicial Power. The judicial power of the State shall be vested in a unified judicial
system, consisting of a Supreme Court, a Superior Court, and such inferior and appellate courts
as may be established by law. All such courts shall be courts of record.
Section 2. Supreme Court. (A) Jurisdiction The Supreme Court shall have jurisdiction of
appeals from final decisions of the Superior Court or, alternatively, of appeals from final
decisions of an intermediate appellate court, if one has been established. The Supreme Court
shall also have jurisdiction of other matters, including
(1) appeals from decisions of the Superior Court that are not yet final, as may be provided by
law;
(2) appeals from appellate decisions of the Superior Court, as may be provided by law;
(3) appeals from determinations regarding disability of the Governor and of the Governor-elect;
(4) appeals from gubernatorial and other executive branch orders and decisions, as may be

provided by law; and
(5) such other jurisdiction as may be provided by law.
(B) Composition The Supreme Court shall consist of a Chief Justice and eight Associate Justices,
who shall sit en banc and not by division or panel when determining the merits of appeals. The
Chief Justice shall be designated by the Judicial Nomination Commission from among the
Justices in regular active service. The Chief Justice shall serve as Chief Justice for a term of four
years or until a successor is designated. The Chief Justice shall be eligible for redesignation as
Chief Justice.
Section 3. Superior Court. (A) Jurisdiction The Superior Court shall have jurisdiction of civil
actions or other matters, at law or in equity, brought in the State; criminal proceedings under any
statute of the State; and such other jurisdiction, including appellate jurisdiction of cases decided
by inferior courts, as may be provided by law.
(B) Composition The Superior Court shall consist of a Chief Judge and 43 or more Associate
Judges, as provided by law. The Chief Judge of the Superior Court shall be designated by the
Judicial Nomination Commission from among the Judges in regular active service and shall
serve as Chief Judge for a term of four years until a successor is designated. The Chief Judge
shall be eligible for redesignation as Chief Judge.
Section 4. Qualifications. (A) Qualifications A person nominated as a Judge or Justice must be
(1) a citizen of the United States;
(2) an active member of the Unified State Bar who has been engaged in the practice of law in the
State for five years preceding nomination but who has not served within the two preceding years
as a member of the Judicial Nomination Commission or the Commission on Judicial Disabilities
and Tenure; and
(3) an actual resident of the State for at least five years immediately prior to nomination.
(B) Disqualifications No Judge or Justice shall hold any other State or Federal paid office,
position of profit, or employment. Upon becoming a candidate for any elective office, or upon
ceasing to reside in the State, a Judge or Justice shall forfeit judicial office.
Section 5. Vacancies in the Office of Judge or Justice. The Governor shall fill any vacancy in
any office of Judge or Justice by appointing one of two or more persons nominated by the
Judicial Nomination Commission.
Section 6. Salary of Judges and Justices. The salary and benefits of a Judge or Justice may not
be reduced during the term in office of the Judge or Justice.
Section 7. Judicial Nomination Commission. The Judicial Nomination Commission shall
consist of nine members, each of whom shall serve for six years and until a successor has been
appointed. Each member shall be a citizen of the United States, shall have been an actual resident
of the State for at least five years prior to appointment, and shall maintain residency in the State.

Section 8. Judicial Nomination Commission Membership. Members of the Commission shall
be selected as follows:
(a) Six members shall be appointed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the House of
Delegates. Two of them shall have been engaged in the practice of law in the State for at least
five successive years preceding appointment. The other four shall not be lawyers.
(b) Two members shall be appointed by the Board of Governors of the Unified State Bar and
shall have been engaged in the practice of law in the State for at least five years preceding
appointment.
(c) One member shall be appointed by the House of Delegates and shall be a lawyer or a retired
Judge or Justice of the State.
Members shall receive compensation as provided by law. The Commission shall choose annually
from among its members its chairperson and such other officers as are deemed necessary.
Section 9. Tenure of Judges and Justices. Judges of the Superior Court and Justices of the
Supreme Court shall be appointed for life, subject to removal by the voters and to removal,
suspension, or involuntary retirement by the Commission on Judicial Disabilities and Tenure, as
provided for in this Article.
Section 10. Retention Elections. In a manner provided by law, each Judge or Justice shall be
subject to retention or removal by the voters, on a nonpartisan ballot, at the first general election
held more than three years after initial appointment. An additional retention election shall be
held every ten years for a Supreme Court Justice, and every six years for a Superior Court Judge.
Not less than eight months prior to a retention election, a Judge or Justice may file with the
Commission on Judicial Disabilities and Tenure a request for official evaluation. If a request is
filed, this Commission shall prepare, not less than 90 days prior to the date of the election, a
written evaluation of the performance and fitness for continued service of the Judge or Justice,
including a rating on a scale established by law. In evaluating the Judge or Justice, the
Commission shall collect relevant information from a representative sample of judges, lawyers,
scholars, litigants, and jurors familiar with the work of the Judge or Justice. The Commission
shall make its report and rating available to the Judge or Justice, the press, and the public. If no
request for evaluation is filed, the Commission shall report that fact.
Section 11. Commission on Judicial Disabilities and Tenure. (A) Qualifications The
Commission on Judicial Disabilities and Tenure shall consist of five members, each serving for a
term of six years. A member must
(a) be a United States citizen who is not an officer or employee of the State government or of the
legislative or executive branches of the federal government; and
(b) have been an actual resident of the State for at least five years immediately prior to
appointment.
(B) Selection Two members shall be lawyers appointed by the Board of Governors of the Unified
State Bar. Two members, one of whom shall not be a lawyer, shall be appointed by the Governor
with the advice and consent of the House of Delegates. One member shall be appointed by the

House of Delegates, and shall not be a lawyer. Members who are lawyers shall have the
qualifications prescribed for persons appointed as Judges of the Superior Court.
(C) Procedure The Commission shall choose annually, from among its members, a chairperson
and such other officers as it may deem necessary. It may adopt any necessary rules of procedure.
It may conduct studies regarding administration of the Judiciary. It may require the Governor to
furnish such records, information, services, and other assistance and facilities as may be
necessary to enable it to perform its functions properly, but information so furnished shall be
treated by it as privileged and confidential. The Commission shall act only at meetings called by
the chairperson or by a majority of the members after notice to all members.
Section 12. Removal, Suspension, and Involuntary Retirement of Judges and Justices. A
Judge or Justice of a court shall be removed from office upon the filing in the Supreme Court by
the Commission on Judicial Disabilities and Tenure of an order of removal certifying the entry,
in any court within the United States, of a final judgment of conviction of a crime which is
punishable as a felony under federal law or which would be a felony in the State. A Judge or
Justice shall also be removed from office upon affirmance of an appeal from an order of removal
filed in the Supreme Court by the Commission on Judicial Disabilities and Tenure (or upon
expiration of the time within which such an appeal may be taken) after a determination by that
Commission of willful misconduct in office, willful and persistent failure to perform judicial
duties, or any other conduct which is prejudicial to the administration of justice.
A Judge or Justice shall be involuntarily retired from office when the Commission on Judicial
Disabilities and Tenure determines that the Judge or Justice suffers from a mental or physical
disability, including habitual intemperance, which is or is likely to become permanent and which
prevents, or seriously interferes with, the proper performance of judicial duties, and that
Commission files in the Supreme Court an order of involuntary retirement and the order is
affirmed on appeal or the time within which an appeal may be taken has expired.
A Judge or Justice shall be suspended without salary upon proof of conviction, which has not
become final, of a crime which is punishable as a felony under federal law or which would be a
felony in the State, or upon the filing of an order of removal which has not become final. A
Judge or Justice shall also be suspended without salary upon the filing by the Commission on
Judicial Disabilities and Tenure of an order of suspension in the Supreme Court. Suspension for
either of these reasons shall continue until termination of all appeals. If the conviction is reversed
or the order of removal is set aside, the Judge or Justice shall be reinstated and shall recover the
salary and all rights and privileges of office.
A Judge or Justice shall be suspended from judicial duties with any retirement salary to which
the Judge or Justice is entitled, upon the filing by the Commission on Judicial Disabilities and
Tenure of an order of involuntary retirement in the Supreme Court. Suspension shall continue
until termination of all appeals. If the order of involuntary retirement is set aside, the Judge or
Justice shall be reinstated and shall recover all judicial salary less any retirement salary received
and shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of office.

A Judge or Justice shall be suspended from all or part of the Judge or Justice's judicial duties,
with salary, if the Commission on Judicial Disabilities and Tenure, upon concurrence of four
members, orders a hearing for the removal or retirement of the Judge or Justice pursuant to this
Section and determines that the suspension is in the interest of the administration of justice, and
files an order of suspension in the Supreme Court. The suspension shall terminate as specified in
the order (which may be modified, as appropriate, by the Commission) but in no event later than
the termination of all appeals.
Section 13. Administration. The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court shall be the administrative
head of all courts of the State. The Chief Justice may assign Judges and Justices for temporary
service in any court. With the approval of the Supreme Court, the Chief Justice shall appoint an
administrative director to serve at the pleasure of the Supreme Court and to supervise the
administrative operations of the judicial system of the State.
Section 14. Financing. Before each fiscal period, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court shall
submit to the Governor a budget for the judicial system, including detailed estimates of
necessary appropriations and expenditures, full-term operating and capital improvements
projections, and a qualitative and quantitative description of court activities. The Governor shall
transmit the proposed budget to the House of Delegates without changing it, but may make
recommendations with respect to it. The Governor shall not be required to propose revenues to
fund the entire submission but must propose revenues to finance that portion of the proposed
budget recommended for acceptance by the House of Delegates.
Section 15. Rulemaking. The Supreme Court shall make and promulgate rules governing the
administration of all courts, including rules governing practice and procedure. These rules may
be changed by law.
Section 16. Vacancies in Judicial Commissions. Persons appointed to fill vacancies arising for
a reason other than expiration of a prior term on the Judicial Nomination Commission or the
Commission on Judicial Disabilities and Tenure shall serve only for the remainder of the
unexpired term. Any vacancy shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was
made.
Section 17. Definition. The term "practice of law" as used in this Article means the active
practice of law, service on the faculty of a law school, or employment as a lawyer by the state
government or by the federal government.
ARTICLE V.
SUFFRAGE
Section 1. Voting Eligibility. Every citizen of the United States is eligible to vote in any election
and to circulate and sign nominating, initiative, referendum, recall, and other petitions authorized
by law, provided that the person
(a) resides or is domiciled in the State or the National Capital Service Area as defined in this
Constitution and does not claim voting residence or the right to vote in any other state, territory,
or country;

(b) will be at least 18 years old on the date of the election;
(c) is not mentally incompetent as determined by a court of competent jurisdiction;
(d) is not incarcerated in a correctional institution as a result of conviction in the United States of
a crime which would be a felony in the State; and
(e) has registered to vote at the time of the election or by the time the petitions are filed.
An eligible person may register at any time except that the House of Delegates may prescribe a
period of delay of up to 30 days between the date on which a person registers and the date on
which that person becomes eligible to vote.
Section 2. Eligibility of Residents Temporarily Out-Of-State. No person shall be deemed to
have lost residence or domicile in the State solely because of temporary absence from the State
while serving in the service of the United States, while serving as an officer or member of the
crew of a merchant vessel, or while attending an educational institution outside the State.
Section 3. Absentee Voting. The House of Delegates shall provide for absentee voting.
ARTICLE VI.
EDUCATION
Section 1. Provision For Education. (A) Preamble Recognizing the distinct and unique heritage
of its diversified population, the State is committed in its educational goals to the preservation of
cultural integrity and to the promotion of equality of opportunity for every individual to develop
fully.
(B) Equal Educational Opportunity The State shall guarantee equality of educational opportunity
in public educational institutions to all residents regardless of race, sex, religion, color, national
origin, citizenship, condition of disability, and other individual characteristics. The State may be
sued for default of this guarantee. The House of Delegates shall provide penalties for any
individual who violates this guarantee.
Section 2. Primary and Secondary Education. (A) Primary and Secondary Schools The State
shall provide for the establishment, financing, and control of a uniform, high-quality, statewide
system of free public primary and secondary schools, including specialized schools, for all
residents. Education to standards established by the State Board of Education shall be
compulsory for all residents between the ages of 6 and 18, except those who have already
completed all secondary school requirements. All public schools shall be free of sectarian or
religious instruction. Children of Diplomatic Corps members may attend public schools, as
provided by the State Board of Education.
(B) State Board of Education The general control and supervision of the public school system
shall be vested in a State Board of Education consisting of nine voting members. Eight members
shall be elected from separate electoral districts varying by no more than three percent from the
average population of all districts, and one shall be a student representative who shall be enrolled
in a public senior high school and elected by the public senior high school student population.
The duties, qualifications, compensation, term of office, and manner of election of the State

Board of Education and the electoral district boundaries shall be as provided by law and by this
Constitution.
(C) State Superintendent of Public Instruction The State Board of Education shall appoint the
State Superintendent of Public Instruction and shall prescribe the length of term, compensation,
powers, and duties of the Superintendent.
(D) Budget The State Board of Education shall prepare and submit to the Governor detailed
estimates of expenditures and appropriations necessary for the maintenance and operation of all
primary and secondary schools. For each fiscal period, the House of Delegates shall appropriate
a total budget sum for the State Board of Education, but not in a line-item manner. This budget
shall include full-term operating and capital improvements projections and qualitative and
quantitative descriptions of school activities. The expenditure of this money shall be under the
exclusive control of the State Board of Education.
(E) Title to Property Any property titled in the name of the District of Columbia or of the State
and used by or acquired for the use of the Board of Education of the District of Columbia or of
the State Board of Education shall henceforth be deemed to be titled in the name of the State
Board of Education.
(F) Control of Property The State Board of Education shall control the leasing and renting of its
buildings and lands. With the advice and consent of the House of Delegates the State Board of
Education may sell and purchase buildings and lands.
(G) Public Involvement in Schools To the maximum extent possible, the State Board of
Education shall promote parental, administrative, community, teacher, and student involvement
in local schools.
(H) Libraries Public libraries and other such institutions may be used to enhance public school
programs relating to the history and culture of the State.
(I) Minimum Standards All private elementary and secondary schools shall be required to meet
the same minimum standards for instructors, instruction, and student achievement as may be
imposed by the State Board of Education upon the public schools. The State Board of Education
may establish equivalent alternatives to the above standards.
Section 3. Higher Education. (A) System of Higher Education The State shall provide for the
establishment, financing, and control of a public system of higher education which shall
constitute a public trust and shall consist of the State University and such other institutions of
higher learning as may be established by law. This system shall be supervised by the Board of
Higher Education which shall be a body corporate. The Board of Higher Education shall have
general supervision of all state institutions of higher instruction, direction and control of all funds
and appropriations, and other powers and duties as prescribed by law.
(B) Board of Higher Education The Board of Higher Education shall consist of
(1) eight voting members, of whom one shall reside in each State Board of Education electoral

district, who shall be appointed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the House of
Delegates, and who shall serve for staggered terms of six years;
(2) three voting members representing alumnae, alumni, and students, of whom one shall be
selected by the body of alumnae and alumni, one shall be a graduate student selected by the
entire graduate student body, and one shall be an undergraduate student selected by the entire
undergraduate student body; and
(3) three ex-officio members without the right to vote: the Governor, the President of the House
of Delegates, and the Superintendent of Public Instruction.
(C) Compensation and Tenure Members of the Board of Higher Education
(1) shall receive no salary, but may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the discharge of their
duties; and
(2) shall not be removed except for cause and by due process of law.
(D) Budget The State Board of Higher Education shall prepare and submit to the Governor
detailed estimates of expenditures and appropriations necessary for the maintenance and
operation of its entire system. The budget for the State Board of Higher Education shall include
all State colleges and universities and the institutions subject to its control. For each fiscal
period, the House of Delegates shall appropriate a total budget sum for the State Board of Higher
Education but not in a line-item manner. This budget shall include full-term operating and capital
improvements projections and qualitative and quantitative descriptions of school activities. The
expenditure of this money shall be under the exclusive control of the State Board of Higher
Education.
(E) Title to Property Any property titled in the District of Columbia or in the State and used by
or acquired for the use of the Trustees of the University of the District of Columbia, or any of its
predecessor institutions, or of the State Board of Higher Education shall henceforth be deemed to
be titled in the name of the State Board of Higher Education, which shall control the leasing and
renting of these properties.
However, no such buildings or lands shall be sold or purchased, except with the consent of the
House of Delegates.
Section 4. Restrictions on Financing of Non-Public Education. (A) Prohibition of Financial
Support to Schools The State shall provide no financial support, either directly or indirectly,
unless earmarked for a program of public service, to any sectarian, denominational, or religious
school, or to any pre-elementary, elementary, secondary, or post-secondary school which is not
owned and exclusively controlled by the State.
(B) Prohibition of Support for Students or Employees Except as otherwise provided in this
Section, the State shall provide no payment; credit; tax benefit, exemption, or deduction; tuition
voucher; or subsidy, grant, or loan of public monies or property, in any way, either directly or
indirectly,
(1) to support the attendance of any student at any pre-elementary, elementary, or secondary
school or other institution at those levels, which is not owned and exclusively operated by the
State; or

(2) to pay the salary of any employee at any non-public school or institution where instruction is
offered in whole or in part to non-public school students at any level.
(C) Students with Disabilities The State may pay the private school tuition of a student with a
disability which renders the student unable to receive an education in the public schools.
(D) Federal Funding Nothing in this Section shall restrict the acceptance of funds from the
government of the United States, nor the expenditure of those funds in accordance with the terms
under which they are accepted.
ARTICLE VII.
FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section 1. Fiscal Period. The fiscal, accounting, and budget periods of the State shall be 24
months which shall commence and terminate as provided by law.
Section 2. The Budget. At a time established by law, the Governor shall submit to the House of
Delegates a balanced operating budget estimate for the next fiscal period. It shall state all
anticipated expenditures and income for the State and for all its departments, agencies, and
subdivisions. At that time, the Governor shall also submit a general appropriation bill or bills
authorizing all anticipated expenditures and a bill or bills to raise all necessary revenues.
From time to time, the Governor may prepare and submit to the House of Delegates such
supplemental or deficiency budget recommendations as in the judgment of the Governor are
necessary to serve the public interest.
The proposed budget shall include a budget message, which shall contain multi-year plans for all
departments, agencies, and subdivisions of the State, and for capital improvements. The period
of the multi-year plans and their specific contents shall be defined by law.
The budget of the Governor shall be available and summaries shall be distributed to the public.
The House of Delegates shall establish an independent agency to project revenue estimates for
the next fiscal period. These projections shall be published and made available to the public.
Section 3. Adoption of the Budget. After receipt of the proposed budget from the Governor and
within a time period established by law, the House of Delegates shall adopt and transmit to the
Governor a balanced operating budget for the State.
Section 4. Expenditures. No money shall be withdrawn from the Treasury except in accordance
with appropriations made by law, nor shall any obligations for the payment of money be incurred
except as authorized by law. The appropriation for each department, agency, or subdivision of
the State shall specify distinctly the sum appropriated and the general or specific purpose for
which it is made.

Section 5. Borrowing. The State may incur indebtedness only by authorization of the House of
Delegates and only by issuing general obligation bonds for capital projects, revenue notes in
anticipation of revenues, and negotiable notes to meet appropriations.
The House of Delegates shall set an overall debt limit for indebtedness through general
obligation bonds.
All indebtedness, except general obligation bonds for capital projects, must be retired within the
same fiscal period or within the succeeding fiscal period.
Section 6. Debt Service Limitations. Long-term debt shall not be incurred to the extent that it
requires debt service of more than 14 percent of the revenues during any biennial fiscal period.
Section 7. Taxation. (A) Taxing Power The State House of Delegates shall have the power to
tax. This power shall never be surrendered, suspended, or contracted away, except as provided in
this Constitution.
(B) Tax Exemptions -- Retail Sales The State House of Delegates shall not have the power to tax
purchases of retail groceries and prescription drugs and other medicines. These terms shall be
defined by the House of Delegates.
(C) Tax Exemptions -- Real Estate Tax exemptions on real property not owned and controlled by
the State or its political subdivisions and not used exclusively for a public purpose may not be
granted by the House of Delegates except with respect to real property used exclusively for nonprofit, religious, educational, or charitable purposes or as required by the United States
Constitution. Private leaseholds, contracts, or interests in land or property owned or held by the
State, or its political subdivisions, shall be taxable to the extent of the interests.
(D) Tax Bills No tax shall be levied, except as provided by law, and every law imposing a tax
shall be addressed in a separate bill. No matter not immediately relating to and necessary for
raising revenue shall be blended with or annexed to a bill for imposing taxes.
Section 8. Earmarking. Except as required by participation in federal programs or interstate
compacts or as needed to secure authorized debt, the State shall not authorize the earmarking of
funds for longer than two fiscal periods.
Section 9. Limitations on Appropriations. No appropriation shall ever be made from any
public fund in aid of any religious creed, church, or sectarian purpose, or to help, support, or
sustain any private school, academy, seminary, college, university, or other institution of
learning controlled by any religious creed, church, or sectarian denomination, unless earmarked
for a program of public service. No grant or donation of personal property or real estate shall
ever be made by the State or any of its political subdivisions for any religious creed, church, or
sectarian purpose.
ARTICLE VIII.
BANKING AND CORPORATIONS

Section 1. State Banking Commission. The House of Delegates shall establish a State Banking
Commission to regulate State chartered financial institutions and to perform such other functions
as may be provided by law.
Section 2. State Depositors Insurance Fund. The House of Delegates shall establish a State
Depositors Insurance Fund System.
Section 3. State Economic Development Bank. The House of Delegates shall establish a State
Economic Development Bank. Its primary responsibility shall be to provide loans to those
individuals, corporations, partnerships, limited partnerships, cooperatives, or other businesses
and establishments that are unable to obtain loans from any private bank, savings and loan
association, or credit union within the State.
Section 4. Corporations. The House of Delegates shall provide by law for the organization,
regulation, and qualification of all corporations, credit unions, unincorporated enterprises, mutual
and cooperative companies and associations, and foreign corporations doing business in the
State.
ARTICLE IX.
LAND AND THE ENVIRONMENT
Section 1. Land. (A) Comprehensive Plan (1) Plan Every ten years within a time period fixed by
law, the Governor shall submit to the House of Delegates and the public a ten-year
comprehensive land use plan. The objective of the plan shall be the use and development of land
in a manner consistent with the public welfare. The neighborhoods of the State shall serve as the
foci for the development of the plan. A summary of the plan shall be distributed to the public.
(2) Citizen Advisory Planning Commission In order to ensure citizen participation in the
development of the land use plan, the Governor shall establish a Citizen Advisory Planning
Commission. The Governor shall determine the size of the Commission and appoint its members
including at least one resident from each legislative district. The House of Delegates shall
determine the terms of office of members of the Commission and establish their rate of
compensation, if any.
(3) Adoption Within a time period fixed by law, after receiving the proposed comprehensive plan
and conducting public hearings on it, the House of Delegates shall consider it, make any
necessary changes, and upon adoption transmit the approved plan to the Governor. The plan shall
guide the actions of all State agencies and commissions.
(B) Eminent Domain Private property shall not be taken or damaged for public purposes without
just compensation. Private property shall not be taken in order to transfer it to another private use
for profit unless the taking serves a compelling public purpose that clearly cannot be achieved by
any alternative means.
(C) Public Land Acquisition The State may acquire interests in real property to control future
growth, development, and land use.

(D) Zoning The House of Delegates shall establish a Zoning Commission to protect the public
health and welfare, protect property, and secure the public safety.
Section 2. Environment. (A) Public Policy It is the responsibility of the State to protect, restore,
and enhance the quality of the human environment for this and future generations.
(B) Preservation The State shall provide for the preservation and development of open green
space and of sites, objects, and properties of historical or cultural value.
(C) Rights of Individuals Each person has the right to a clean and healthful environment and has
a corresponding duty to refrain from environmental impairment. Each person may enforce these
rights and duties against any party, public or private, through appropriate legal proceedings,
subject to reasonable limitations and regulation as provided by law.
(D) Legislative Responsibility The House of Delegates shall establish an agency and enact other
appropriate legislation to carry out the policies of this Section
ARTICLE X.
PUBLIC SERVICES
Section 1. Transportation. Public Transportation performs a function essential to the general
welfare of the State. It is a policy of the State to provide convenient access to effective means of
public transportation at reasonable rates for all of its geographical communities.
Section 2. Utilities. The general welfare of the State requires effective regulation of public
utilities through consumer participation and the protection of consumers from excessive rates. To
advance these goals,
(a) it is hereby declared that utility service shall be provided at the lowest reasonable rates
sufficient to assure adequate, efficient, and reasonable services; and that unreasonably high rates
based on excessive capital investment shall not be permitted;
(b) the House of Delegates shall establish one or more commissions to regulate public utilities
and provide for the conservation of energy resources within the State, as provided for by law;
and
(c) there shall be an Office of People's Counsel to represent consumers before the regulatory
commission or commissions.
Section 3. Publicly Owned Utilities. Utilities are works of public necessity and importance the
services of which the State may itself provide. The State may acquire, own, or operate public
utilities and provide their services to consumers.
ARTICLE XI.
HEALTH, HOUSING, AND SOCIAL SERVICES
Section 1. Health. (A) General Provisions The State shall provide for the protection and
promotion of public health. The State shall have the power to assist residents unable to maintain
standards of living compatible with decency and good health care.

(B) Disabled Persons As provided by law, the State shall provide treatment, care, and training,
including education to their fullest potential, for persons suffering from mental illness, physical
disability, or retardation.
The State shall have complete administrative control of state hospitals and other state institutions
and centers established to assist these persons and shall administer other programs as provided
by law.
As provided by law, the State shall regulate private institutions established to assist these
persons.
There shall be a Chief Administrator of Mental Health who shall be responsible for regular,
systematic visitation and inspection of all public and private institutions used for the care and
treatment of mentally disabled persons.
(C) Public Health Facilities The State shall have the power to provide for the establishment and
maintenance of a network of comprehensive health facilities which provide for the prevention,
treatment and care of illnesses and health-related problems.
(D) State Board of Health There shall be a State Board of Health whose responsibilities shall
include enforcing, overseeing, and maintaining decent health and nutritional care, and
maintaining the vital statistics necessary to improve the health of the people.
The House of Delegates shall determine the size and composition of the Board.
Section 2. Housing. The State shall have the power to provide low and moderate income
families with assistance in obtaining decent, sanitary, and safe housing and to develop or
rehabilitate substandard areas. The exercise of this power is deemed for public use and purpose.
Section 3. Social Services. (A) Unemployment and Workers Compensation The State shall have
the power to provide an adequate system of unemployment compensation and workers
compensation benefits for employees, including provisions for compensating employees absent
from work because of pregnancy, childbirth, or the need to care for newborn or young children.
(B) Public Sector Jobs and Welfare The State shall have the power to create jobs and to provide
transfer payments for the purpose of meeting basic human needs.
(C) Day Care Centers The State shall provide and maintain public day care centers as provided
by law and shall establish standards for publicly and privately operated day care centers.
(D) Youth Offenders and Criminals The State shall provide for the maintenance and support of
institutions for the detention of youth offenders and persons charged with or convicted of crimes.
Rehabilitation programs shall be developed and maintained for the transition of persons from
these institutions to the community, as provided by law.

(E) The Elderly The State shall have the power to establish and promote programs to assure the
economic and social well-being of the elderly, including provision for their health, security, and
access to public buildings. The State shall regulate private and public nursing homes for the
elderly and the disabled, as provided by law.
(F) Cultural Resources The State shall have the power to preserve and enhance the cultural,
creative, and traditional arts of its people and shall maintain an appropriate facility for this
purpose. The State shall preserve historical sites and landmarks.
ARTICLE XII.
LABOR
Section 1. Collective Bargaining. Persons in private and public employment shall have the right
to organize and bargain collectively, through representatives of their own choosing. The right to
strike is fundamental and is an inherent part of the right to organize and bargain collectively. The
right of public employees to strike shall not be abridged unless the abridgement serves a
compelling governmental interest and is narrowly drawn so as to serve that interest, and it is
clear that no alternative form of regulation is possible.
Section 2. Minimum Wages, Equal Pay, Health and Safety. The House of Delegates shall
provide for minimum wages, equal pay for equal work and equal pay for comparable work, and a
safe and healthy workplace. Minimum wages established shall apply to all employees covered
thereby. The House of Delegates may enact other laws to enhance and promote the dignity and
general welfare of labor, but no laws shall be enacted which impair the ability of collective
bargaining organizations to carry out their lawful functions.
Section 3. Administration of Labor Relations. The House of Delegates shall establish an
agency or agencies within one of the principal executive departments to administer and enforce
all laws, regulations, and programs concerned with collective bargaining and the general welfare
of labor.
ARTICLE XIII.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS
Section 1. Authority. The House of Delegates shall permit areas of the State to elect local
officers and to exercise such local authority, other than the authority to tax, zone land, or enact
legislation, as it may by law provide. The House of Delegates shall have the ultimate authority
for establishing standards and for determining whether the proposed local government unit meets
those standards.
Section 2. Charters. The House of Delegates shall establish procedures to permit an area to
petition for the election of a Charter Commission. A charter shall include provisions for a charter
amendment process and for a process by which neighboring areas may later be considered for
inclusion in the local government unit. The House of Delegates shall provide that the charter
drafted by the elected Commission be submitted to the voters of the proposed unit for approval
before submission to the House of Delegates.

Section 3. Special Districts. The House of Delegates shall have the power to create special
districts for public purposes.
Section 4. Advisory Neighborhood Commissions. Advisory Neighborhood Commissions shall
exercise the authority which they had at the time the State entered the Union, and any additional
authority subsequently provided by law. The House of Delegates may modify this structure but
shall always provide for elected advisory neighborhood mechanisms in unchartered areas of the
State.
Section 5. Implementation. A law implementing this Article shall be passed by the House of
Delegates within two years of the convening of the first House of Delegates and shall be subject
to the approval of the voters of the State.
ARTICLE XIV.
APPORTIONMENT
Section 1. Reapportionment of Legislative Districts. The State shall be apportioned into 40
legislative election districts of substantially equal population. As soon as practicable after the
results of each decennial census are reported, but in any event not later than the calendar year
following the taking of the census, these districts shall be revised to maintain districts of
substantially equal population. The Reapportionment Commission established by this Article
shall conduct the reapportionment, which shall be subject to judicial review upon the application
of any qualified registered voter of the State.
Section 2. Reapportionment Commission. (A) Membership The reapportionment of legislative
districts shall be carried out by a Reapportionment Commission consisting of five members
appointed by the Governor in January of the year before the year in which the decennial census
is conducted. No member may hold any other public office. The State Committee of each of the
three political parties having the highest number of votes in the most recent gubernatorial
election shall submit to the Governor a list of three names of registered voters who are members
of that party for the consideration of the Governor. The President of the House of Delegates shall
also submit to the Governor the names of three registered voters, regardless of party affiliation.
The Governor shall appoint Commission members from the combined list of 12 names. No more
than two of the five appointees shall be members of the same political party. Any independent
candidate receiving one of the three highest totals in the most recent gubernatorial election shall
be treated as a state committee for purposes of this Section.
(B) Additional Duties In addition to establishing legislative districts, the Commission shall
establish any districts required for the members of the United States House of Representatives
representing this State, establish appropriate single-member districts for any other elective office,
and participate with the United States in joint preparations for the decennial census.
(C) Term The Reapportionment Commission shall continue in office until the completion of the
reapportionment relevant to all offices as a result of the decennial census, including the final
adjudication of all appeals.

Section 3. Apportionment Standards. Each district shall have a population which varies by no
more than three percent from the average population of all districts. Each district shall respect
neighborhood integrity, be contiguous, and be as compact as possible. In reapportioning the
State, the Commission may take into account natural features and open spaces, such as rivers and
parks, but shall not take into account the addresses of incumbent elected officials, the political
affiliations of registered voters, the results of previous elections, or demographic information
other than the actual number of persons found by the most recent census to reside in each census
tract or other geographical area. No reapportionment shall be effected for the purpose of favoring
or harming any political party, incumbent public official, or other person or group.
ARTICLE XV.
INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM, AND RECALL
Section 1. Right to Initiative, Referendum and Recall. Although the legislative power of the
State is vested in the House of Delegates, the people reserve to themselves the power to propose,
adopt, and repeal laws and constitutional provisions. The people also reserve to themselves the
power to remove from office elected State and local government officials.
Section 2. Initiative Procedures. (A) Definition, Presentation, and Limitations Initiative is the
power of the voters to propose laws and amendments to the Constitution and to adopt or reject
them.
An initiative may be proposed by presenting to the Lieutenant Governor the text of the proposed
law or constitutional amendment.
The proposed law or amendment to the Constitution shall embrace a single subject and related
matters.
(B) Obligation and Responsibilities Upon receipt of an initiative, the Lieutenant Governor shall
submit it immediately to the Attorney General.
Within 20 calendar days, the Attorney General shall provide the proponents of the initiative an
advisory opinion on its clarity and whether or not it meets the requirements of this Article for
placement on the ballot.
The proponents shall then resubmit the proposal, revised or unchanged, to the Lieutenant
Governor.
Within 20 calendar days, the Lieutenant Governor shall prepare an accurate title and summary
statement for use on the petition form.
(C) Certification and Circulation Upon the receipt of petitions signed by qualified voters equal
in number to five percent, in the case of a law, and ten percent, in the case of a constitutional
amendment, of the votes cast for all candidates for Governor in the most recent gubernatorial
election, provided that the respective percentages for each type of initiative must have been met

in at least two-thirds of the legislative districts of the State, the Lieutenant Governor shall submit
the measure at the next election held at least 120 days after it qualifies.
The circulation period allowed for an initiative petition shall be 180 days after the proponents
receive a title and summary from the Lieutenant Governor.
(D) Effective Date An initiative approved by a majority of the voters shall take effect 30 days
after certification by the Lieutenant Governor.
(E) Limitations No proposal shall be the subject of any initiative if it relates to the appointment,
qualifications, tenure, removal, or compensation of Justices or Judges; to the powers,
jurisdiction, creation, or abolition of courts or any rules thereof; to the appropriation of any
money other than new revenues created and provided thereby; or to the diminishment of the
rights and protections of any persons as enumerated in this Constitution or as provided by law.
(F) Conflicts If provisions of two or more initiatives approved at the same election conflict, those
of the measure receiving the highest affirmative vote shall prevail.
(G) Amendment and Repeal The House of Delegates may amend or repeal an initiative law
during a two-year period following its enactment only by a three-fourths majority vote of the
Delegates present and voting. Repeal of an initiative by another law shall become effective only
when approved by the voters unless the law adopted by initiative permits repeal without their
approval.
Section 3. Referendum Procedures. (A) Definition The referendum is the power of the voters
to approve or reject newly enacted laws or parts of laws.
(B) Requirements A referendum may be proposed by a voter to the Lieutenant Governor, within
90 days after the enactment of the law which is the subject of the referendum provided, that the
petition contains the required number of signatures of voters.
A petition must be signed by registered voters in number not less than five percent of the
statewide votes cast for all candidates for Governor at the most recent gubernatorial election,
provided that the signature percentage requirement shall have been met in at least two-thirds of
the legislative districts of the State.
The petition shall ask that a law or a part of a law be submitted to the voters.
(C) Implementation (1) Upon verification of the petition signatures, the Lieutenant Governor
shall submit the referendum to the voters for approval or disapproval.
(2) The referendum election shall be held 60 days after verification of requirements.
(3) The Governor may call a special statewide election.
(D) Limitations A referendum petition may not be filed with respect to a law or part of a law that
provides human rights or protections or relates to appointment, qualifications, tenure, removal, or
compensation of judges; the powers, creation, or abolition of courts; the appropriation of money

for the current or ordinary expenses of the State or for any of its departments, boards,
commissions, or institutions. Any capital project may be the subject of a referendum, except for
capital projects for public education.
(E) Effective Date The result of a referendum election takes effect immediately after the official
declaration of the vote by the Lieutenant Governor.
(F) Exception Except in the case of an emergency law, the timely filing of a referendum petition
and verification by the Lieutenant Governor that it complies with the requirements of this Article
shall suspend the operation of the law which is the subject of the referendum unless the
Lieutenant Governor finds that it does not comply with all the requirements of this Article.
A majority affirmative vote shall put the law into effect; a negative vote shall render it null and
void. An emergency law remains in effect unless there is a majority vote against the law, in
which case it shall become null and void.
Section 4. Publicity. The House of Delegates shall provide methods of publicizing all initiative
or referendum measures referred to the voters with statements for and against the measures so
referred. The Lieutenant Governor shall undertake distribution of the measures to ensure that
voters shall have an opportunity to study the measures prior to the election.
Section 5. Recall Procedures. (A) Definition Recall is a procecess [process] by which voters
may remove an elected State or local government official.
(B) The Petition Process The Lieutenant Governor shall supervise the petition process including
certification of the required number of signatures. A maximum of 90 days is allotted for the
collection of signatures.
(C) The Petition Statement The recall petition shall contain a concise statement alleging the
reasons for recall. The wording of the statement shall be determined by the petitioners in
cooperation with the Attorney General.
(D) Petition Signature Requirements A recall petition shall contain at least 25 percent of the total
number of all votes cast in the most recent election for the position in question. In the case of a
statewide office, this 25 percent requirement must be met in at least two-thirds of the legislative
districts.
(E) Initiation of Recall Recall cannot be initiated within the first six months or the last 12 months
of the term of an elected official nor upon more than one occasion during that term.
(F) Time of Recall Election A recall election shall be held no less than 60 days nor more than 120
days after certification of the signed petitions.
(G) Votes Required for Recall A simple majority vote shall remove the official from office.

(H) Reimbursement Within limits set by the House of Delegates, recall expenses incurred by the
official, if retained, shall be paid by the State.
(I) Filling a Recall Vacancy When an official is recalled, the vacancy shall be filled by a special
election held no more than 90 days after the recall certification or at the next regularly scheduled
election if it occurs within 150 days.
(J) Local Government Units Any local government shall have the power to provide in its charter
for recall of its elected officials.
Section 6. Enabling Legislation. This article is self-executing, but enabling legislation may be
enacted.
ARTICLE XVI.
INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS
Section 1. Boundaries of the State. (A) The boundaries of the State shall be subject to the
approval of the Congress of the United States and the voters of the State. The State shall include,
however, at least all of the territory of the District of Columbia which is not included within the
boundaries of the National Capital Service Area as defined in this Section.
The outer limits of the boundaries of the National Capital Service Area are:
Beginning at the Northwest point on the present Virginia-District of Columbia boundary,
running due east to the eastern shore of the Potomac River;
thence generally south along the shore at the mean high water mark to the northwest corner of
the Kennedy Center;
thence east along the north side of the Kennedy Center to a point where it reaches the E Street
Expressway;
thence east on the expressway to E Street Northwest and thence east on E Street Northwest to
Eighteenth Street Northwest;
thence south on Eighteenth Street Northwest to Constitution Avenue Northwest;
thence east on Constitution Avenue to Seventeenth Street Northwest;
thence north on Seventeenth Street Northwest to Pennsylvania Avenue Northwest;
thence east on Pennsylvania Avenue to Jackson Place Northwest;
thence north on Jackson Place to H Street Northwest;
thence east on H Street Northwest to Madison Place Northwest;
thence south on Madison Place Northwest to Pennsylvania Avenue Northwest;
thence east on Pennsylvania Avenue Northwest to Fifteenth Street Northwest;
thence south on Fifteenth Street Northwest to Pennsylvania Avenue Northwest;
thence southeast on Pennsylvania Avenue Northwest to John Marshall Place Northwest;
thence north on John Marshall Place Northwest to C Street Northwest;
thence east on C Street Northwest to Third Street Northwest;
thence north on Third Street Northwest to D Street Northwest;
thence east on D Street Northwest to Second Street Northwest;
thence south on Second Street Northwest to the intersection of Constitution Avenue Northwest
and Louisiana Avenue Northwest;

thence northeast on Louisiana Avenue Northwest to North Capitol Street;
thence north on North Capitol Street to Massachusetts Avenue Northwest;
thence southeast on Massachusetts Avenue Northeast so as to encompass Union Square;
thence following Union Square to F Street Northeast;
thence east on F Street Northeast to Second Street Northeast;
thence south on Second Street Northeast to D Street Northeast;
thence west on D Street Northeast to First Street Northeast;
thence south on First Street Northeast to Maryland Avenue Northeast;
thence generally north and east on Maryland Avenue to Second Street Northeast;
thence south on Second Street Northeast to C Street Southeast;
thence west on C Street Southeast to New Jersey Avenue Southeast;
thence south on New Jersey Avenue Southeast to D Street Southeast;
thence west on D Street Southeast to Canal Street Parkway;
thence southeast on Canal Street Parkway to E Street Southeast;
thence west on E Street Southeast to the intersection of Canal Street Southwest and South
Capitol Street;
thence northwest on Canal Street Southwest to Second Street Southwest;
thence south on Second Street Southwest to Virginia Avenue Southwest;
thence generally west on Virginia Avenue to Third Street Southwest;
thence north on Third Street Southwest to C Street Southwest;
thence west on C Street Southwest to Sixth Street Southwest;
thence north on Sixth Street Southwest to Independence Avenue;
thence west on Independence Avenue to Twelfth Street Southwest;
thence south on Twelfth Street Southwest to D Street Southwest;
thence west on D Street Southwest to Fourteenth Street Southwest;
thence south on Fourteenth Street Southwest to the middle of the Washington Channel;
thence generally south and east along the midchannel of the Washington Channel to a point
due west of the northern boundary line of Fort Lesley McNair;
thence due east to the side of the Washington Channel;
thence following generally south and east along the side of the Washington Channel at the
mean high water mark, to the point of confluence with the Anacostia River, and along the
northern shore at the mean high water mark to the northernmost point of the Eleventh Street
Bridge;
thence generally south and east along the northern side of the Eleventh Street Bridge to the
eastern shore of the Anacostia River;
thence generally south and west along such shore at the mean high water mark to the point of
confluence of the Anacostia and Potomac Rivers;
thence generally south along the eastern shore at the mean high water mark of the Potomac
River to the point where it meets the present southeastern boundary line of the District of
Columbia;
thence south and west along such southeastern boundary line to the point where it meets the
present Virginia-District of Columbia boundary; and
thence generally north and west up the Potomac River along the Virginia-District of Columbia
boundary to the point of beginning.

(B) Where the National Capital Service Area is bounded by a street, the street and its sidewalks
shall be included within that Area.
(C) The District Building shall, however, be part of the State.
Section 2. Cooperation With Other Governments. With the consent of the House of
Delegates, the Governor may enter into agreements or compacts for any public purpose with
other governmental entities including other states and the United States. At the request of the
United States and with the consent of the House of Delegates, the Governor shall negotiate
contracts with the United States to provide police, fire, sanitation, and other services to foreign
embassies and chanceries and to federal buildings and other federal property located in the State
or in the National Capital Service Area.
Section 3. Acceptance of Federal Funds. No taxes shall be imposed by the State upon any
property now owned or hereafter acquired by the United States, unless the property becomes
taxable because the United States disposes of it or consents to taxation. The State may accept
from the United States grants and other payments, including payments in lieu of tax revenues
that would be collected were the federal property in the State subject to taxation.
ARTICLE XVII.
AMENDMENT AND REVISION
Section 1. Introduction. Amendments to this Constitution may be proposed by the House of
Delegates, an initiative, or a constitutional convention.
Section 2. The House of Delegates. The House of Delegates may propose an amendment by the
affirmative votes of two-thirds of all members. The Lieutenant Governor shall distribute the
proposed amendment no less than 90 days before the next appropriate election.
The Lieutenant Governor shall then place the proposed amendment on the ballot.
The amendment shall take effect immediately after certification that it received a majority vote,
unless otherwise provided in the amendment.
Section 3. The Initiative. The voters of the State may propose an amendment by initiative as
prescribed by this Constitution.
Section 4. The Constitutional Convention. (A) Call The voters of the State may, by the
initiative, call for a constitutional convention at any time. The convention may propose
amendments or revisions to the Constitution. The Lieutenant Governor shall distribute the
proposed amendment or amendments no less than 90 days before the next appropriate election.
The Lieutenant Governor shall then place the amendment or amendments on the ballot. The
proposed amendment or amendments shall take effect immediately after certification of a
majority vote.

(B) Decennial Review If within ten years following the date this Constitution enters into force
the people do not file an initiative to call a constitutional convention, the Lieutenant Governor
shall place on the ballot at the next general election a referendum consisting of the question:
"Shall there be a constitutional convention?" Thereafter, the same requirement shall hold for
every succeeding ten-year period.
(C) Preparatory Commission After an affirmative vote to hold a constitutional convention, the
Governor shall provide for a preparatory commission to assemble information on constitutional
issues and to organize administrative support for the convention.
(D) Delegates Each legislative district shall elect an equal number of delegates to the
constitutional convention.
Section 5. Conflicting Amendments. If provisions of two or more amendments approved at the
same election conflict, those of the amendment receiving the highest affirmative vote shall
prevail.
Section 6. Disapproval of Amendments. If an amendment is disapproved neither that
amendment nor any substantially similar amendment shall be submitted to the voters for a period
of two years.
Section 7. Enabling Legislation. This article shall be self-executing, but enabling legislation
may be enacted.
ARTICLE XVIII.
TRANSITION
Section 1. Effective Dates. The provisions of Sections 1 through 3 of this Article, providing for
the establishment of the first government of the State, shall enter into force on a date specified in
the federal legislation admitting the State to the Union. The State shall come into being and the
remainder of this Constitution shall enter into force at 10:00 A.M., Eastern Standard Time, on
the second day of the tenth full month after that date.
Section 2. Initial Apportionment and Elections. (A) Commission Immediately following the
enactment of legislation admitting this State to the Union, the Mayor of the District of Columbia
shall initiate appointment of a Commission and the Council of the District of Columbia shall
provide election procedures. The Mayor of the District of Columbia shall issue a Proclamation
and shall promptly appoint, with the advice and consent of the members of the Council, nine
members of a Commission of Initial Apportionment, including at least one member from each of
the eight wards of the District. The members and staff of the Commission shall be compensated
as provided by law. The Commission shall, within thirty days after its last member is appointed,
apportion the State into 40 legislative districts in a manner consistent with Section 3 of Article
XIV of this Constitution.
(B) First Elections By law, the Council of the District of Columbia shall provide for the election
of the House of Delegates, Governor, and Lieutenant Governor of the State. Regular or special

primary and general elections shall be held for these offices within 120 days after the initial
apportionment plan enters into force, except that these elections shall not take place during July
or August or before September 15th. The 120-day limitation may be extended, if necessary, in
order to avoid having to hold these elections during those months.
Section 3. Initial Terms of Office of Delegates, the Governor, and Lieutenant
Governor. (A) Staggered Terms for Delegates At a public drawing within five days after the
initial apportionment plan has entered into force, the Chair of the Commission on Apportionment
shall select, at random, half of the legislative districts to be Group A districts. The initial terms of
office of members of the House of Delegates elected from Group A districts shall begin 20 days
after the date of certification of their elections and shall expire on the second Monday in January
of the second odd-numbered year following their election. The initial terms of office of members
of the House of Delegates elected from other districts shall begin 20 days after the date of
certification of their election and shall expire on the second Monday in January of the first oddnumbered year following their election; except that if this provision would result in a term
shorter than one year, their terms shall expire on the second Monday in January of the third oddnumbered year following their election.
(B) Governor and Lieutenant Governor The terms of office of the first Governor and the first
Lieutenant Governor shall begin 20 days after certification of their elections and shall expire on
the second day of January following the date of the next Presidential election. If this provision
would result in terms shorter than one year, their terms shall expire on the second day of January
of the year after the second Presidential election year following their election.
(C) Holdover Term for Mayor If the first election for Governor of the State has not been held by
the date that the State comes into being, or if for any other reason a Governor cannot assume
office on that date, the Executive power of the State shall be exercised temporarily by the person
last elected as Mayor of the District of Columbia prior to the effective date of this Section of the
Constitution.
(D) Holdover Term for Council Members If the first election for State Delegates has not been
held by the date that the State comes into being, or if for any other reason the members of the
House of Delegates cannot assume office on that date, the legislative power of the State shall be
exercised temporarily by the persons last elected as members of the Council of the District of
Columbia prior to the effective date of this Section of the Constitution.
(E) No Interim Elections No new election for Mayor or Council shall be held after this Section of
the Constitution becomes effective. If such an election would ordinarily be scheduled between
the date when this Article of the Constitution becomes effective and the date when the other
Articles of the Constitution become effective, the Mayor and the Council shall hold over.
(F) Eligibility for Re-election The first term of the Governor and Lieutenant Governor shall count
as a full term for the purposes of determining eligibility for re-election only if it is of four-year
duration or longer.

Section 4. Judiciary and Other Officers. (A) Judges The Chief Judge and Associate Judges of
the Court of Appeals of the District of Columbia on the date when this section enters into force
shall become the Chief Justice and Associate Justices of the Supreme Court of the State. The
Chief Judge and Associate Judges of the Superior Court of the District of Columbia on that date
shall become the Chief Judge and Associate Judges of the Superior Court of the State. At the
general election held in the final year of their terms, such judges shall be subject to retention or
rejection by the voters in accordance with the provisions of Article IV. Retired Judges of the
Court of Appeals of the District of Columbia and of the Superior Court of the District of
Columbia shall become Retired Justices of the Supreme Court of the State and Retired Judges of
the Superior Court of the State, respectively. They may be assigned by the Chief Justice for
temporary service.
(B) Judicial Nomination Commission The terms of seven of the members first appointed to the
Judicial Nomination Commission shall be shorter than six years, as provided by law, so that
terms of members will expire on a staggered basis. The Governor of the State and the Board of
Governors of the Unified State Bar shall determine, for their initial appointments, which
appointees shall serve which terms.
(C) Commission on Judicial Disabilities and Tenure The persons first selected as members of the
Commission on Judicial Disabilities and Tenure shall begin to serve their terms upon the
expiration of the terms of corresponding incumbent members of the Commission on Judicial
Disabilities and Tenure established by Section 431 of the District of Columbia Self-Government
and Reorganization Act (Dec. 24, 1973, 87 Stat. 792).
(D) Marshals By agreement between the State and the United States, the United States Marshal
may provide services to the courts of the State until the State has appointed its own officers to
provide these services.
(E) Other Officers Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, all other officers filling any
office by election or appointment shall continue to exercise their duties, according to their
respective commissions or appointments, until their offices shall have been abolished or their
successors have assumed office.
Section 5. Existing Laws, Rights, and Proceedings. (A) Laws and Regulations All laws and
regulations of the District of Columbia not inconsistent with this Constitution shall continue in
force until they expire by their own limitation or are amended or repealed.
(B) Congressional Legislation Legislation passed by Congress applicable only to the District of
Columbia and not inconsistent with this Constitution is hereby adopted as state law, subject to
amendment or repeal by the House of Delegates.
(C) Legal Continuity All existing writs, actions, suits, judicial and administrative proceedings,
civil or criminal liabilities, prosecutions, judgments, sentences, orders, decrees, appeals, causes
of action, contracts, claims, demands, titles, and rights shall continue unaffected except as
modified in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. The State shall be the legal
successor to the District of Columbia in all matters.

(D) Residence and Qualifications Residence, citizenship, or other qualifications under the
District of Columbia may be used toward the fulfillment of corresponding qualifications required
by this Constitution.
(E) Debts, Assets, and Records The debts and liabilities of the District of Columbia, as of the
date that the State comes into being, shall be assumed by the State, and debts owed to the District
of Columbia shall be collected by the State. Assets and records of the District of Columbia shall
become the property of the State.
Section 6. United States Senators and Representatives. (A) Senators-Elect and
Representatives-Elect The Senators-elect and Representatives-elect chosen by the people prior to
admission of the State to the Union shall serve as United States Senators and Representatives in
Congress until their successors have assumed office.
(B) First Elections New elections for these offices shall be held at the first general election
which occurs in an even-numbered year after this Constitution becomes effective.
(C) Staggered Terms for Senators At that time, one Senator shall be elected for the long term and
one Senator for the short term. Each term shall begin on the third day of the following January
and shall expire on the third day of January in an odd-numbered year to be determined by
authority of the United States.
Section 7. Agencies With Federally-Appointed Officers. Boards, commissions, or other
agencies of the District of Columbia, the duties of which are consistent with this Constitution and
the membership of which includes persons who hold office because they also hold or were
appointed by persons who hold federal office, shall continue to function without those Federallyappointed officers. No vacancies shall be deemed to be created by the abolition of the Federal
positions.
Section 8. Transfer of Matters to the Attorney General. Upon assuming office, the Attorney
General of the State shall assume control of all matters formerly handled by the Corporation
Counsel of the District of Columbia.
When the Attorney General is prepared to handle legal matters of the type previously handled by
the United States Attorney for the District of Columbia, the Attorney General shall arrange with
the United States Attorney for the orderly transfer of such matters to the Office of the Attorney
General. The House of Delegates may limit the time within which matters shall be transferred.
The Attorney General may agree with the United States Attorney to enable the United States
Attorney to continue to handle any case or category of cases, including any case arising after this
Constitution becomes effective, so that responsibility over these matters is transferred in an
orderly manner. To facilitate continuity, the Attorney General may also agree to permit the
United States Attorney to complete any case.
Until a matter is transferred at the request of the Attorney General, it may be handled by the
United States Attorney as if it had been transferred to the Attorney General.

Section 9. Amendments Before the Constitution Enters into Force. After the voters have
approved it and before Article XVII enters into force, amendments to this Constitution may be
adopted by the voters of the District of Columbia after affirmative recommendation by a District
of Columbia Statehood Constitutional Convention or by a two-thirds vote of the Council of the
District of Columbia. This Section shall take effect when the Constitution is approved by the
voters.

