I.
HISTORIC PERSPECTIVE
II. PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT PROCESS
III. DISCUSSION DRAFT CONSTITUTION

I.

HISTORIC PERSPECTIVE

Background
In 1980, citizens of the District called for convening a Constitutional Convention for the
purpose of creating a constitution for the “State of New Columbia” so that statehood could be
pursued following the Tennessee Plan. That plan, which initially led to Tennessee being
admitted as a State of the United States in 1789, requires that the citizens of an area seeking
admission as a state vote to adopt a constitution that is both consistent with the Constitution of
the United States of America and that embraces a republican form of government. That
constitution is then sent to the President and the Congress requesting statehood. That request for
statehood can be granted by the Congress through an Act of Congress.
The 1982 Constitutional Convention produced the 1982 Constitution for the State of New
Columbia that was approved by a majority of the citizens voting in a referendum in 1982.
Pursuant to the Tennessee Plan, that Constitution was sent to the President and the Congress with
a request for statehood. During our research, we did not find that any President or any session of
Congress has ever responded to that submission. There is no Constitutional provision or federal
law that governs this type of submission. So, Congress is not required to act in any particular
amount of time. Arguably, the submission expired with the expiration of the 1982 session of
Congress pursuant to the same rules as other pending matters.
In 1987, the Council of the District of Columbia enacted D.C. Law 7-8 which was a
slightly revised version of the 1982 Constitution of the State of New Columbia. That document
has never been voted upon by the citizens of the District. It is simply an Act of the Council that
recommends to the Congress a revised version of the 1982 Constitution of the State of New
Columbia. During our research, we did not find that any President or any session of the
Congress has ever responded to the 1987 submission.
If we are to pursue the Tennessee Plan in 2017, we must have a constitution that has been
approved by the citizens of the District and submitted to the President and the Congress. The
1982 Constitution that was submitted to the President and the Congress as a part of the
Tennessee Plan process was not acted upon by the Congress and expired as a document that any
subsequent Congress could act upon because there is no evidence that it was refiled during
another session to keep it “alive” in the Congress. Minimally, the passage of nearly 35 years
since the 1982 vote by the citizens of the District is not contemporaneous with the views of the
current citizens or current law. The 1982 Constitution was revised by the Council in 1987;
however, that version of the Constitution was passed by the Council but not approved by the
citizens. As a result, we are left with a 1982 Constitution submission that most likely has
expired, and a 1987 Constitution that has not been approved by the citizens.

Updating the 1987 Constitution
Compliance with the Tennessee Plan requires that the constitution that is submitted to the
President and the Congress be approved by the citizens of the District. The 1987 Constitution
has never been approved by the citizens of the District. The simplest solution to that issue might
seem to be to have the citizens of the District vote on and approve the 1987 Constitution. That
solution has several draw-backs.
First, there have been a number of changes to the structure of the District government
since 1987 that create conflicts or inconsistencies with the 1987 Constitution. For example, the
Home Rule Act (the District’s existing de facto constitution) was amended by the citizens to
provide for an elected Attorney General. The changes to and requirements of that office that
were made by the citizens of the District will need to be incorporated into the language of the
1987 Constitution. Second, the Congress created an “independent” office of Chief Financial
Officer, a position now deeply embedded in our day – to – day governance. The addition of
those offices into the executive branch of the District government will also need to be
incorporated (in some way) into the 1987 Constitution.
In addition, the Congress has provided federal funding for the Superior Court, the Court
of Appeals, the Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency, the Pretrial Services Agency,
and the housing of all adult felons convicted of D.C. Code offenses. The jurisdiction/authority of
several agencies including the Board of Education have changed. For example, the role and
function of the Armory Board have been changed. The role and function of the Board of
Elections and Ethics have changed. These changes, and others, need to be accommodated in law
but do not rise to the Constitutional level and are not included in the updated version of the 1987
Constitution. If they were to be included, each modification would require a constitutional
amendment rather than regular legislative action.
Moreover, since the introduction of the two previous Constitutions, the District endured a
significant financial crisis, necessitating the imposition of a Control Board. Since our emergence
from the Control Board, we have self-governed with balanced budgets and a credit rating that is
the envy of jurisdictions across the country. Drafting a revised constitution enables us to
incorporate the lessons learned from self-administration, without encrusting upon our
Constitution structures imposed upon the District by Congress when our democracy and habits of
self-government and financial responsibility were less engrained.
The legal team/working group assembled by the Commission has worked to incorporate
these changes into a proposed updated version of the 1987 Constitution. The goal was to remain
true to the essential principles of the 1987 Constitution, while making those changes that were
mandated by intervening actions of the citizens of the District, the Council of the District of
Columbia, and/or the federal government.

The Need for a Contemporaneous Document
The approval of any constitution by the Congress will require that the proposed
constitution minimize controversy and that it be similar to the constitutions of the other 50 states.
In that regard, the Constitution of the State of New Columbia (1) should be presented to the
citizens of the District so as to allow them to demonstrate their current support for statehood; (2)
should be simplified and harmonized in a way that does not radically alter the current
organization status of the District governmental structure (which Congress is familiar with); and
(3) should not create political disgruntlement among affected local parties that would cause them
to seek a remedy for their unhappiness in the Congress or dampen local support for admission as
the 51st state.
The 1987 Constitution is a 52 page document that largely tracks the language from the
Home Rule Act which currently serves as our Constitution, as well as the body of our legislative
laws. Much of that language is, in the working group’s view, unnecessary for a constitution, but
is better suited for legislative acts by the Council (House of Delegates). Thus, the working
group included language required for a Constitutional foundation in the Constitution and left out
the provisions of the Home Rule Act that are legislative, which would require an amendment to
the Constitution for non-substantive changes. Amending the Constitution should not be an easy
thing to do, but amending the constitution to change the name and function of the Board and
Elections and Ethics to the Board of Elections, for example, should not require a constitutional
amendment.
The 1987 Constitution needs to be updated so as to accommodate changes in our
government since 1987, and to broaden the universe of supporters for the current government (in
form and function) transitioning from that of a city/county/ state to that of a state as seamlessly
as possible. The 1987 Constitution also needs to be updated to reflect the reality of our current
governmental operation and to accommodate future changes in our governmental structure.
Attached is the discussion draft of the Constitution for the State of New Columbia for
your consideration that has been produced by the working group.

II.

PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT PROCESS

The New Columbia Statehood Commission (the “Commission”) is hereby announcing
the process and guiding principles that ultimately will result in allowing D.C. residents to
approve a state Constitution and petition Congress to admit the State of New Columbia into the
Union. The process provides for public participation in developing the Constitution, along with
the Commission and the Council. It will culminate with the Council adopting a resolution calling
for an Advisory Referendum in the November 8, 2016, general election through which the
people may approve the Constitution and formally call on their elected officials to petition
Congress for statehood. This process follows the “Tennessee Plan” of having the electorate vote
to approve: (1) statehood, (2) a Constitution, (3) state boundaries, and (4) a republican form of
government, and petitioning Congress for admission into the Union. The Commission invites all
District residents to participate in this process.
Summary
The process for moving toward statehood will be an Advisory Referendum Resolution
(“Referendum Resolution”). Leading up to the Referendum Resolution, the process will include
soliciting input from District residents, convening a Constitutional Convention, consideration of
amendments to the Constitution, and approval of the Constitution by the Commission. We
anticipate that the Council will place before the voters the question of whether it should petition
Congress to enact the New Columbia Admission Act (“Admission Act”), and whether the voters
wish to approve the Constitution and approve the other elements to follow the Tennessee Plan.
The final Constitution will be included in a Referendum Resolution and submitted to the Council
for approval.
The Commission intends to complete its work by June 30th in order to submit the
Constitution to the Council for its consideration, and for the Council to seek approval of the
Referendum Resolution. In order for the Council and Commission to complete their work to
have the Referendum on the November 8 ballot, and for this work to be publicized at the
Democratic and Republican National Conventions, the Council must submit the Referendum
Resolution to the Board of Elections by July 8th. The Commission has noted that holding the
referendum on this date is necessary in order for the District to present its package of credentials
for admission to the Union to the new President and Congress in January of 2017, in accordance
with the Tennessee Plan.
Guiding Principles
The Commission will use seven principles to guide the drafting of the proposed state
Constitution. These principles will guide the Commission, Council, and the public in developing
the final Constitution that will be placed before the voters for approval. According to these
principles, the Constitution should:

(1) Promote stability by maintaining the District’s basic current governing structure;
(2) Build upon the work of statehood efforts in the 1980s, but simplify and modernize the
Constitutions developed then;
(3) Establish the structures necessary for good government;
(4) Empower the legislature and executive to govern in the interests of the people who elect
them;
(5) Produce orderly and responsible governance;
(6) Reflect the values of District residents; and
(7) Demonstrate that the District merits congressional admission as a state.
Process for Consideration of Constitution
To meet the Commission’s rapid timeline, expedited procedures will be required.
Described below is a process for the Commission to consider public input, being mindful of the
twin goals of adhering to a strict timeline yet allowing for the maximum amount of community
engagement.
In order to understand the necessity for expedited procedures for adoption of the
Constitution, one must first look back to the last District of Columbia Constitutional Convention,
which occurred in 1982. During that process, District resident’s elected 45 delegates to attend the
Constitutional Convention, which itself lasted approximately four months. The process began on
November 4, 1980, when sixty percent of District residents voted and approved the District of
Columbia Statehood Constitutional Convention Initiative of 1979 (DC Law 3-171). This law
called for the creation of a state Constitutional Convention to advance statehood for the District
of Columbia. During 1981, the DC Statehood Commission was established. On November 4,
1981, forty-five delegates were elected to the Constitutional Convention to serve two or three
year terms. The elected delegates to the District of Columbia Constitutional Convention
convened to write a Constitution for the State of New Columbia on January 31, 1982. After
much deliberation, on May 27, 1982, the Convention chose New Columbia as the name for the
new state and approved the new Constitution on May 29, 1982. On November 2, 1982, D.C.
voters ratified the Constitution for the State of New Columbia.
The District does not need to duplicate the 1982 process, including the public election of
delegates, to approve the Constitution in time to submit the Constitution to the Council by June
30, and for the Council to submit the document to the Board of Elections by July 8th.
Technological innovations since 1982 make a much more simultaneous and directly participatory
process possible for updating rapidly the 1982 and subsequent 1987 Constitution, which was
approved by Council legislation (DC Law 7-8). We will start from many of the decisions those
delegates took months to decide, such as the name of our new state.
The District currently has in place the legal structures necessary to consider a revised
Constitution. In 2014, the District of Columbia Council created the New Columbia Statehood
Commission to coordinate the District's statehood initiatives (DC Law 20-481). The Commission
is an independent agency within the District government that provides support to the Statehood
Congressional Delegation, the Mayor, and the Council in promoting statehood for the residents

of the District. The Commission is co-chaired by Mayor Muriel Bowser and Council Chairman
Phil Mendelson, and includes Statehood Senators Paul Strauss and Michael D. Brown, and
Representative Franklin Garcia. The established rules of the Commission developed by the
Attorney General will govern its own deliberations and decision-making. To ensure an expedited
process, this Commission will oversee the consideration of the revised Constitution while
ensuring the input of District residents.
District resident participation in the process is critical and will be felt at every stage of the
process, including a full opportunity for residents to voice their views and offer their suggestions
about the content of the Constitution. First and foremost, District residents will express their
opinion when they vote on Election Day, November 8th whether to approve the Constitution and
whether they wish the Council and the Mayor to petition the President and Congress for
statehood. There will be many other opportunities for resident input prior to the election,
including but not limited to:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

a website where residents can provide comments;
committees on which residents can serve or observe meetings;
town hall meetings in which residents can participate;
a two-day Constitutional Convention where residents can offer comments and
testify;
public hearings the Council may wish to hold; and
solicitation of comments and possible hearings by the Board of Elections.

In order to meet the timeline for submission of the Resolution to the Board of Elections
on July 8th, while at the same time ensuring participation of D.C. residents as described above,
the following procedure would provide a fair and open process:
(1)

Release of draft Constitution to the public and file with the Council. The
Statehood Commission will release a draft of the new Constitution for
consideration by District residents and the Council no later than May 6th.

(2)

Set up a website to receive comments electronically. The Commission has
created a website to solicit and receive comments by District residents. This
section of the statehood.dc.gov website will be operational as soon as the draft
Constitution is released, and the Commission will publicize the website address
widely. The Commission will enter all testimony and submissions filed
electronically into the record of the Constitutional Convention and will attribute
the same weight as if the testimony were submitted during the Constitutional
Convention weekend.

(3)

Convening of town hall meetings. The Commission has planned a series of town
hall meetings in all 8 Wards during the month of May and early June to ensure
participation by District residents who may not be able to attend the
Constitutional Convention weekend. Just as with the website, the Commission
will place all testimony and submissions from the hearings/town hall meetings

will be entered into the record of the Constitutional Convention and will attribute
the same weight as if it were submitted during the Constitutional Convention
weekend.
(4)

Convening of Constitutional Convention. The Commission will convene the
Constitutional Convention during the weekend of June 17th and 18th to take
testimony (which may include proposed amendments) from District residents. At
this time, the Commission will also hear reports from the Committees working on
various aspects of the promotion of the Constitution and statehood (see below).

(5)

Consideration of the Constitution by the Commission. At its scheduled
meeting on June 24th, the Commission will decide, given the feedback it has
received from District residents, whether and how to amend the draft Constitution
during a public mark up and vote. The Commission will then submit its final
approved draft of the Constitution to the Mayor in her role as Chief Executive
Officer of the District, and the Mayor shall submit the final Constitution to the
Council for its consideration no later than June 30th. This version of the document
will supplant the original draft submitted to the Council in May. At this time, the
Commission also will transmit to the Council the full record of all public
comments received by the Commission in order for the Council to have a
comprehensive record of the legislative history of the Constitution.

(6)

Council consideration of the Constitution and Referendum Resolution. The
Council may hold hearings and take testimony on the Constitution simultaneously
to the Commission’s consideration of the document, under a schedule to be
determined by the Council. The Council then will vote on the Referendum
Resolution, including the final Constitution, to be submitted to the Board of
Elections by the July 8th deadline.

(7)

Board of Elections Consideration. At a public meeting in July, the Board of
Elections will certify the ballot language proposed by the Council in the
Referendum Resolution and certify for the ballot the Advisory Referendum,
which will put the approval of the Constitution in keeping with the elements of
the Tennessee Plan to District voters.

(8)

District residents approve the Constitution and approve all elements of the
Tennessee Plan. Assuming the Board of Elections certifies the Referendum for
the ballot; residents will vote whether to approve the Constitution and all elements
of the Tennessee Plan on November 8th.

(9)

District officials petition Congress to enact the Admission Act. Assuming
voters approve the Advisory Referendum, District officials will then petition
Congress to enact the Admission Act, consistent with the people’s will. The
Council may also adopt appropriate legislation as necessary.

Committees
In addition to the process presented above for District residents to consider and approve
the Constitution and approve all elements of the Tennessee Plan, the Statehood Commission also
has created several committees to give residents the opportunity to help promote the referendum
and the Constitution and press Congress to pass the Admissions Act. Those committees include:
(1)

All 8 Wards, which will educate District residents about the benefits of statehood
and organize District residents to support the statehood effort;
(2)
All Americans for DC Statehood, which will present strategies to engage the
country;
(3)
Advocacy, which will determine what messages and financial support will be
required to support the statehood initiative;
(4)
Communications, which will develop outreach to the media and District
residents; and
(5)
Cleveland/Philadelphia, which will conduct education and advocacy for
statehood at the conventions.
The Commission will release the membership of the committees no later than May 12th,
and hold organizational meetings the week of May 16th and 17th. In addition, the committees may
desire to hold their own public roundtable/town hall meetings during late May and early June to
solicit District residents’ views on the subject matter of the committees. The committees also
will report on their progress to the Constitutional Convention in June, and their testimony will
become part of the formal record of the proceedings.
Procedure for Receiving Oral and Written Testimony
For the Commission to complete its work within its strict deadlines, there must
necessarily be a sensible procedure for the Commission to receive oral and written submissions
through any of the various means of engagement created by the Commission for residents to
participate in the process. Those procedures will follow the Council’s procedure for taking oral
testimony (three minutes for presentations by individuals and five minutes for organizations) as
well as limiting all individuals to submissions of no more than 3 pages in length (with reasonable
margins and fonts) and limiting organizations to submissions of no more than 5 pages in length
(with reasonable margins and fonts).
Conclusion
The process outlined above will ensure that the District completes its work on the revised
Constitution, Admission Act, and Referendum Resolution in time for the Advisory Referendum
to be placed on the November 8th ballot for consideration by District residents. In addition, this
process allows all District residents who wish to provide their views regarding the Constitution
to have those views heard and considered. This procedure will allow the Constitution to be
approved by residents in time for the Commission to present the District’s credentials for
admission into the Union to the new President and Congress when they take office in January
2017. The Commission looks forward to working with the Council and District residents to
establish the State of New Columbia.

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT

The Constitution of the State of New Columbia
PREAMBLE
Whereas, We the people of the District of Columbia desire to become a state of the United States
of America, where, like citizens of the other states, we will enjoy the full rights of citizens of the
United States of America: to democracy and a republican form of government, to enact our own
laws governing state affairs, and to voting representation in the United States Congress.
Now, Therefore, We the People of the District of Columbia do adopt this Constitution, to be
known as the Constitution of the State of New Columbia, to establish the means of selfgovernance of the State of New Columbia and to take our place, irrevocably, as a state, among
the states comprising the United States of America.
BILL OF RIGHTS
I.

Freedom of religion, of speech, and of the press
The State of New Columbia shall make no law respecting an establishment of
religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech,
or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the
government for a redress of grievances.

II.

Right to keep and bear arms
A well-regulated militia, being necessary to the security of a free state, the right of the
people to keep and bear arms, shall not be infringed.

III.

Quartering of soldiers
No soldier shall, in time of peace be quartered in any house, without the consent of
the owner, nor in time of war, but in a manner to be prescribed by law.

IV.

Security from unwarrantable search and seizure
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects,
against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no warrants
shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and
particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be
seized.

1

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
V.

Rights of accused in criminal proceedings
No person shall be held to answer for a felony offense, unless on a presentment or
indictment of a grand jury; nor shall any person be subject for the same offense to be
twice put in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be
a witness against himself or herself, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property,
without due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use, without
just compensation.

VI.

Right to a speedy jury trial, witnesses, assistance of counsel
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public
trial, by an impartial jury of the state, and to be informed of the nature and cause of
the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him or her; to have
compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his or her favor, and to have the
assistance of counsel for his or her defense.

VII.

Trial by jury in civil cases
In suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars,
the right of trial by jury shall be preserved, and no fact tried by a jury, shall be
otherwise reexamined in any court of the State of New Columbia, than according to
the rules of the common law.

VIII. Bails, fines, and punishments
Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and
unusual punishments inflicted.
IX.

Reservation of the rights of the people
The enumeration in this Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be construed to deny
or disparage others retained by the people.

X.

Equal protection
The State of New Columbia shall not deny to any person within its jurisdiction the
equal protection of the law.

2

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
ARTICLE I
THE LEGISLATIVE BRANCH
Section
1. Legislative power
2. Composition; election of members; vacancies
3. Qualifications for holding office
4. Acts, resolutions, procedures, and specific authorities
5. Speaker of the House of Delegates
6. Legislative districts
7. Advisory Neighborhood Commissions
Sec. 1. Legislative power
The legislative power of the State of New Columbia shall be vested in a legislature to be
known as the House of Delegates, and shall extend to all rightful subjects of legislation
within the State of New Columbia, consistent with the Constitution of the United States
of America and the provisions of this Constitution.
Sec. 2. Composition; election of members; vacancies
a. The House of Delegates shall consist of 13 members:
1. The Speaker of the House of Delegates who shall be elected on a partisan basis at
large by the qualified voters of all of the State of New Columbia.
2. Four members shall be elected on a partisan basis at large by the qualified voters
of all of the State of New Columbia.
3. Eight members shall be elected on a partisan basis by the qualified voters from
each of the 8 legislative districts of the State of New Columbia.
b. The term of office for Delegates shall be 4 years, and shall begin at noon on January 2nd
of the year following their election.
c. The House of Delegates may establish its committee structure by Resolution.
d. By a 5/6 vote of its members, the House of Delegates may adopt a resolution of expulsion
of one of its members, if it finds, based on substantial evidence, that the member took an
action that amounts to a gross failure to meet the highest standards of personal and
professional conduct.

3

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
e. (1) In the event of a vacancy in the House of Delegates of a member elected from a
legislative district, the elections agency shall hold a special election in the District. The
person elected as a member to fill a vacancy in the House of Delegates shall take office
on the day on which the elections agency certifies the election, and shall serve as a
member of the House of Delegates only for the remainder of the term during which such
vacancy occurred, unless re-elected in a subsequent election. (2) Other than a vacancy in
the Office of Speaker caused by a vacancy in the Office of the Governor, in the event of a
vacancy in the House of Delegates of a member elected at large who is affiliated with a
political party, the central committee of such political party shall appoint a person to fill
such vacancy, until the elections agency can hold a special election to fill such vacancy.
The person appointed to fill such vacancy shall take office on the date of the appointment
and shall serve as an At Large member of the House of Delegates until the day on which
the elections agency certifies the election of a candidate elected to fill such vacancy in
either a special election or a general election. The person elected to fill such a vacancy
shall take office on the day the elections agency certifies the election, and shall serve only
for the remainder of the term during which such vacancy occurred. With respect to a
vacancy of a member elected at large who is not affiliated with any political party, the
House of Delegates shall appoint a similarly non-affiliated person to fill such vacancy
until such vacancy can be filled in a special election in the manner prescribed in this
paragraph. Such person appointed by the House of Delegates shall take office and serve
as a member at the same time and for the same term as a member appointed by a central
committee of a political party.
Sec. 3. Qualifications for holding office
a. No person shall hold the office of member of the House of Delegates, including the
Speaker of the House, unless he or she: (1) is a qualified voter of the State of New
Columbia; (2) resides in and is domiciled in the State of New Columbia and if he or she
is nominated for election from a particular legislative district, resides in the district from
which he or she is nominated; (3) has resided and been domiciled in the State of New
Columbia for 1 year immediately preceding the day on which the general or special
election for such office is to be held; and (4) holds no public office (other than his or her
employment in and position as a member of the House of Delegates), for which he or she
is compensated in an amount in excess of his or her actual expenses in connection
therewith, except that nothing in this clause shall prohibit any such person, while a
member of the House of Delegates, from serving as a delegate or alternate delegate to a
convention of a political party nominating candidates for President and Vice President of
the United States, or from holding an appointment in a reserve component of an armed
force of the United States other than a member serving on active duty under a call for
more than 30 days.
4

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
b. The Speaker of the House of Delegates shall not engage in any outside employment,
whether as an employee or through self-employment, or hold any position, other than
Speaker of the House of Delegates, for which he or she is compensated in excess of
actual expenses.
c. A member of the House of Delegates shall forfeit his or her office upon failure to
maintain the qualifications required by this section or upon conviction of a felony.
Sec. 4. Acts; resolutions; procedures; specific authorities
a. (1) The House of Delegates, to discharge the powers and duties imposed herein, shall
pass Acts, adopt Resolutions and adopt rules, upon a vote of a majority of the members of
the House of Delegates present and voting, unless a greater proportion of members is
provided in this Constitution.
(2) Except as provided in paragraph (4) of this subsection, the House of Delegates shall
use Acts for all legislative purposes.
(3) The House of Delegates shall hold two readings for all Acts, except upon declaration
by two-thirds of its members of an emergency, in which case such Act shall only be
effective for a period not to exceed 90 days.
(4) Resolutions shall be used: (A) to express simple determinations, decisions, or
directions of the House of Delegates of a special or temporary character; and (B) to
approve or disapprove proposed actions of a kind historically or traditionally transmitted
by the Mayor to the Council of the District of Columbia under the Home Rule Act. Such
resolutions must be specifically authorized by Act and must be designed to implement
that Act.
(5) Resolutions may be approved upon a single reading and may take effect immediately
upon such approval.
b. Every Act shall be published upon becoming law, and Resolutions shall be published
promptly after approval by the House of Delegates. The House of Delegates shall adopt
and publish rules of procedures which shall include provision for adequate public notice
of intended actions of the House of Delegates. Proposed Acts and proposed Resolutions
shall be made promptly available to the public.
c. An Act passed by the House of Delegates shall be presented by the Speaker of the House
of Delegates to the Governor, who shall, within 10 calendar days after the Act is
presented, either approve or disapprove such Act. To approve an Act, the Governor shall
affix his or her signature to it, and such Act shall become law. To disapprove such Act,
the Governor shall, within 10 calendar days after it is presented to him or her, return such
Act to the House of Delegates setting forth in writing the reasons for such disapproval. If
any Act so passed shall not be returned to the House of Delegates by the Governor within
10 calendar days after being presented to the Governor, the Governor shall be deemed to
5

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
have approved it, and such Act shall become law unless the House of Delegates by a
recess of 10 days or more prevents its return, in which case it shall not become law. Each
10 calendar day period referenced in this section excludes Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays.
d. If, within 30 calendar days after an Act has been timely returned by the Governor to the
House of Delegates with his or her disapproval, two-thirds of the members of the House
of Delegates present and voting vote to reenact such Act, the Act shall become law
without the Governor’s signature.
e. (1) In the case of any Budget Act adopted by the House of Delegates and submitted to the
Governor, the Governor shall have power to disapprove any items or provisions, or both,
and approve the remainder. To exercise such disapproval, the Governor shall append to
the signed Act a statement indicating the item(s) or provision(s) which he or she
disapproves, and shall, within such 10-day period, return a copy of the Act and statement
to the House of Delegates.
(2) If, within 30 calendar days after any such Budget Act has been timely returned by the
Governor to the House of Delegates, two-thirds of the members of the House of
Delegates present and voting vote to reenact any such item or provision, it shall become
law.
f. By Act, the House of Delegates shall have authority to create or abolish any office,
agency, department, or instrumentality of the State of New Columbia.
g. The House of Delegates may appoint an Auditor, who shall serve for a term of 6 years
and shall be paid at a rate of compensation as may be established by the House of
Delegates, not to exceed the rate of pay of the Speaker of the House. The Auditor may
conduct audits and investigations of such matters as may be referred to it by the House of
Delegates or as otherwise authorized by the rules of the House of Delegates. In carrying
out an audit or investigation, the Auditor shall have access to all books, accounts, records,
reports, findings and other papers, things, or property belonging to or in use by any
agency of the State of New Columbia necessary to facilitate the audit and not subject to a
privilege.
h. The House of Delegates, or any Committee or person authorized by it, shall have the
power to investigate any matter relating to the affairs of the State of New Columbia, and
for that purpose may issue subpoenas and administer oaths to require the attendance and
testimony and the production of evidence. In conducting a lawful investigation, the
House of Delegates or one of its Committees may seek enforcement of any subpoena it
issues in the Superior Court of the State of New Columbia.
6

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
i. The House of Delegates may by Resolution call for an advisory referendum upon any
matter upon which the House of Delegates desires to take action.
j. A majority of the number of non-vacant seats of the House of Delegates shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business.
k. The House of Delegates may establish by its rules what number of members constitutes a
quorum for holding hearings or voting in a committee of the House of Delegates.
Sec. 5. Speaker of the House of Delegates
a. The Speaker of the House of Delegates shall be the presiding officer of the House of
Delegates.
b. When the Office of Governor is vacant, the Speaker of the House of Delegates shall act in
the Governor's stead. While the Speaker of the House of Delegates is acting as Governor
he or she shall not exercise any of his or her authority as Speaker of the House of
Delegates or a member of the House of Delegates. While the Speaker of the House of
Delegates is acting Governor, the House of Delegates shall select one of the elected AtLarge members of the House of Delegates to serve as Speaker, until the return of the
regularly elected Speaker of the House of Delegates.
Sec. 6. Legislative districts
The boundaries of the legislative districts shall be established from time to time, at least
decennially, by an Act of the House of Delegates. Each legislative district shall consist of
contiguous territory, be compact in form, and be of substantially equal population to the
other legislative districts.
Sec. 7. Advisory Neighborhood Commissions
a. The House of Delegates shall by Act divide the State of New Columbia into
neighborhood commission areas of substantially equal population, which neighborhoods
shall be represented by an elected Advisory Neighborhood Commissioner. Each
Advisory Neighborhood Commissioner shall be elected from a single member district on
a nonpartisan basis. Candidates for Advisory Neighborhood Commissioner shall qualify
for election by gathering signatures of at least five percent of the qualified voters in their
neighborhood commission area.

7

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
b. Each Advisory Neighborhood Commission may: (1) advise the House of Delegates and
the Executive Branch on matters of public policy; (2) employ staff and expend public
funds as authorized by the annual budget for the State of New Columbia for public
purposes within its neighborhood commission area; and (3) shall have such other
advisory powers and responsibilities as the House of Delegates may establish by Act.

ARTICLE II
THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH
Section
1. Executive power
2. Election of Governor
3. Qualifications for holding office; vacancy; compensation
4. Powers and duties of the Governor
5. Office of Attorney General
6. Office of the Chief Financial Officer
7. State Board of Education
Sec. 1. Executive power
The executive power of the State of New Columbia shall be vested in the Governor.
Sec. 2. Election of Governor
The Governor shall be elected on a partisan basis by the qualified voters of the State of
New Columbia for a term of 4 years beginning at noon on January 2nd of the year
following his or her election.
Sec. 3. Qualifications for holding office; vacancy; compensation
a. (1) No person shall hold the Office of Governor unless he or she: (A) is a qualified voter
of the State of New Columbia; (B) has resided and been domiciled in the State of New
Columbia for 1 year immediately preceding the day on which the general or special
election for Governor is to be held; and (C) is not engaged in any employment (whether
as an employee or as a self-employed individual) and holds no public office or position
(other than his or her employment in and position as Governor), for which he or she is
compensated in an amount in excess of his or her actual expenses in connection
therewith, except that nothing in this clause shall be construed as prohibiting such
person, while holding the Office of Governor, from serving as a delegate or alternate
delegate to a convention of a political party nominating candidates for President and Vice
President of the United States, or from holding an appointment in a reserve component of
8

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
an armed force of the United States other than a member serving on active duty under a
call for more than 30 days. The Governor shall forfeit his or her office upon failure to
maintain the qualifications required by this paragraph.
(2) To fill a vacancy in the Office of Governor, the elections agency shall hold a special
election at least 70 days and not more than 174 days after such vacancy occurs, unless it
determines that such vacancy could be more practicably filled in a special election held
on the same day as the next general election to be held in the State of New Columbia.
The person elected Governor to fill a vacancy in the Office of Governor shall take office
on the day the elections agency certifies his or her election, and shall serve as Governor
only for the remainder of the term during which such vacancy occurred. When the Office
of Governor becomes vacant, the Speaker of the House of Delegates shall become acting
Governor and shall serve from the date such vacancy occurs until the date on which the
elections agency certifies the election of the new Governor, at which time he or she shall
again become Speaker of the House of Delegates. While the Speaker of the House is
acting Governor, he or she shall receive the compensation regularly paid the Governor,
and shall receive no compensation as Speaker or member of the House of Delegates.
b. Should vacancies arise simultaneously for both the Speaker of the House of Delegates
and the Governor, the order of succession shall be the At Large members of the House of
Delegates in order of seniority of continuous service, followed by the Attorney General.
Temporary or partial disability, or short periods of unavailability, shall not constitute a
vacancy nor trigger a special election.
c. The Governor shall receive compensation, payable in equal installments, at a rate of pay
established by Act. The House of Delegates shall not reduce the salary of the Governor.
Any changes in the Governor’s compensation, upon enactment by the House of
Delegates, shall apply beginning with the next gubernatorial term after the effective date
of such Act.
d. The Governor shall forfeit office upon conviction of a felony.
Sec. 4. Powers and duties of the Governor
The Governor shall be the chief executive officer of the State of New Columbia
government. The Governor shall be responsible for the faithful execution of the laws of
the State of New Columbia and for carrying out such other powers and authorities that
may reside in or be vested in the Office of the Governor. The Governor shall be
responsible for the proper execution of all laws of the State of New Columbia, and for the
proper administration of the affairs of the State of New Columbia coming under his or
her jurisdiction or control, including but not limited to the following powers, duties, and
functions:
9

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
a. The Governor may designate the officer or officers of the executive branch of the State of
New Columbia, who may, during periods of absence from the State of New Columbia, or
disability, execute and perform the powers and duties of the Governor.
b. The Governor shall administer the personnel functions of the executive branch of the
State of New Columbia, including all laws relating to the appointment, promotion, duties,
discipline, separation, and other conditions of employment of personnel in the Office of
the Governor, personnel in departments of the State of New Columbia, and members and
employees of boards, offices, commissions, and other agencies.
c. The Governor shall, through the heads of administrative boards, offices, commissions,
and agencies, supervise and direct the activities of such boards, offices, commissions, and
agencies.
d. The Governor may submit proposed Acts and Resolutions to the House of Delegates.
e. The Governor may delegate any of his or her functions (other than the function of
approving or disapproving Acts passed by the House of Delegates) to any officer,
employee, or agency of the executive office of the Governor, or to any director of an
executive department who may, with the approval of the Governor, make a further
delegation of all or a part of such functions to subordinates under his or her jurisdiction.
f. The Governor, shall be the custodian of the corporate seal of the State of New Columbia
and shall use and authenticate it in accordance with law.
g. The Governor shall appoint an Administrator and Chief Operating Officer, who shall
serve at the pleasure of the Governor, who shall assist the Governor in carrying out the
Governor's functions under this Constitution, and whose salary shall be set by the
Governor.
h. The Governor shall have the right to be heard by the House of Delegates or any of its
committees.
i. The Governor may issue and enforce administrative orders, not inconsistent with this
Constitution, or with any act of the House of Delegates, to carry out his or her functions
and duties.
j. The Governor may reorganize the offices, agencies, and other entities within the
executive branch of the government of the State of New Columbia.

10

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
k. The Governor shall have plenary power to grant pardons, commutations, and reprieves,
and to remit, forgive or reduce fines and forfeitures, for all offenses against the laws of
the State of New Columbia.
l. To advance the general welfare and provide for public safety, the Governor may enter
into compacts and agreements with other states, localities, non-profit chartered entities,
the federal government and federal instrumentalities, and may enter into public-private
partnerships, and, consistent with federal law, may enter into agreements with foreign
nations, cities or businesses, provided that any financial obligations of such compacts,
agreements, and partnerships shall be approved by the House of Delegates.
m. The Governor shall be the planning authority for the State of New Columbia.
n. The Governor shall have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the State
of New Columbia, except authority assigned by this Constitution to the Chief Financial
Officer, and shall have authority to examine and approve all contracts, orders, and other
documents by which the State of New Columbia incurs financial or other obligations.
Sec. 5. Office of Attorney General
a. There is established within the executive branch of the State of New Columbia
government an Office of the Attorney General for the State of New Columbia headed by
an Attorney General. The Attorney General shall be elected by the qualified voters of the
State of New Columbia, on a partisan basis, for a term of 4 years beginning at noon on
January 2 of the year following his or her election.
b. (1) If a vacancy in the position of Attorney General occurs as a consequence of
resignation, permanent disability, death, or other reason, the elections agency shall hold a
special election. The person elected Attorney General to fill a vacancy in the Office of the
Attorney General shall take office on the day on which the elections agency certifies his
or her election, and shall serve as Attorney General for the remainder of the term during
which such vacancy occurred. (2) When the position of Attorney General becomes
vacant, the Chief Deputy Attorney General shall become the Acting Attorney General
and shall serve until the date the elections agency certifies the election of the new
Attorney General, at which time he or she shall again become the Chief Deputy Attorney
General. While the Chief Deputy Attorney General is Acting Attorney General, he or she
shall receive the compensation regularly paid the Attorney General, and shall receive no
compensation as Chief Deputy Attorney General.
c. The term of office of the Attorney General shall coincide with the term of office of the
Governor.
11

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
Sec. 6. Chief Financial Officer for the State of New Columbia
a. The Chief Financial Officer for the State of New Columbia shall be appointed by the
Governor with the advice and consent, by resolution, of the House of Delegates, and shall
report to the Governor. The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed for a term of 5
years. Any Chief Financial Officer may continue to serve beyond his or her term until a
successor takes office.
b. If there is a vacancy in the Office of the Chief Financial Officer as a consequence of
resignation, permanent disability, death, or other reason, the Governor shall appoint one
of the Deputy Chief Financial Officers, or any other person qualified to serve, to serve as
the Chief Financial Officer in an acting capacity. The Governor shall thereafter nominate
a person to serve as Chief Financial Officer, for the remainder of the term during which
the vacancy occurred; provided, that the Governor shall submit the nomination to the
House of Delegates for its approval as provided in paragraph (1) of this subsection.
c. The Chief Financial Officer may be removed for cause by the Governor, subject to the
approval of the House of Delegates by a resolution approved by not fewer than 2/3 of the
members of the House of Delegates present and voting.
d. The Chief Financial Officer shall, under the direction of the Governor, prepare the
budgets and financial plans for the State of New Columbia for submission by the
Governor to the House of Delegates.
e. Under the direction of the Governor, who has the specific responsibility for formulating
budget policy, and using the technical and human resources of the Office of the Chief
Financial Officer, the Chief Financial Officer shall: (1) assure that all financial
information submitted by the Governor to the House of Delegates or for any other official
purpose is accurate and complete; (2) prepare and submit to the Governor and the House
of Delegates and make public annual fiscal year estimates of all revenue for the State of
New Columbia and quarterly re-estimates of the revenues of New Columbia during the
fiscal year; (3) supervise and assume responsibility for financial transactions to ensure
adequate control over revenues and resources; (4) maintain systems of accounting and
internal control designed to provide full disclosure of the impact of the activities of the
New Columbia government, adequate financial information necessary for management
purposes, effective control over and accountability for all funds, property, and other
assets of the State of New Columbia, and reliable accounting results to serve as the basis
for preparing and supporting agency budget requests and controlling the execution of the
budget; (5) submit to the House of Delegates a financial statement containing such details
and at such times as the House of Delegates may specify; (6) supervise and assume
responsibility for the assessment of all property subject to assessments and taxes: which
includes preparing tax maps, and providing notice of taxes and special assessments;
12

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
(7) supervise and assume responsibility for the levying and collection of all taxes, special
assessments, licensing fees and other revenues of the State of New Columbia and
receiving all amounts paid to it; (8) maintain custody of all public funds; (9) apportion
funds made available so as to prevent deficiencies or a need for supplemental
appropriations; (10) certify all contracts and leases prior to execution as to the availability
of funds; (11) determine the regularity, legality and correctness of bills, invoices,
payrolls, claims, demands or charges; (12) supervise and administer all borrowing
programs; (13) administer the cash management program of the State of New Columbia;
(14) administer such payroll and retirement systems as the House of Delegates may by
Act assign to it; (15) govern the accounting policies and systems of the State of New
Columbia; (16) timely prepare the yearly, quarterly and monthly financial reports of the
accounting and financial operations of the State of New Columbia; (17) prepare fiscal
impact statements on such regulations, multi-year contracts, agreements, and proposed
legislation as the Governor and House of Delegates may require by Act or request; (18)
certify all collective bargaining agreements and nonunion pay proposals as to the
availability of funds before submission to the House of Delegates, and prepare any
financial analysis requested by the Governor of proposed terms or agreements.
Sec. 7. The State Board of Education
a. Composition; elections
1. The State Board of Education shall consist of nine members, one from each
legislative district and one elected At-Large. By Act, the length of terms and
provisions for addressing vacancies may be established.
2. A President and Vice President of the State Board of Education shall be elected from
among the members of the State Board of Education.
b. Powers
1. The State Board of Education shall be responsible for advising the Governor on

educational matters, including state standards, state policies, including those
governing special, academic, vocational, charter and other schools, state objectives
and state regulations.
2. By Act, the House of Delegates may establish which educational policies, if any, shall

be subject to the approval of the State Board of Education; provided, such policies
shall not include policies that were not subject to the approval of the state board of
education for the District of Columbia that existed immediately prior to the effective
date of this Constitution.
13

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
ARTICLE III
THE JUDICIAL BRANCH
Section
1. Judicial power
2. Nomination and appointment to the State of New Columbia Courts
3. Qualification for nomination and appointment; removal
4. Powers of the State of New Columbia Courts
5. Designation of Chief Judges
Sec. 1. Judicial power
The judicial power of the State of New Columbia is vested in the State of New Columbia
Court of Appeals and the Superior Court of the State of New Columbia. Collectively
these shall be referred to as the State of New Columbia Courts.
Sec. 2. Nomination and appointment to the State of New Columbia Courts
a. The Governor shall nominate, from the list of persons recommended to him or her by the
State of New Columbia Judicial Nomination Commission, and, by and with the advice
and consent of the House of Delegates, appoint all judges of the State of New Columbia
Courts.
b. A judge appointed to the State of New Columbia Courts shall be appointed for a term of
fifteen years, unless removed or suspended, and upon completion of such term, such
judge shall continue to serve until reappointed or a successor is appointed and is sworn
in. A judge in good standing may be reappointed.
Sec. 3. Qualification for nomination and appointment; compensation; removal
a. No person may be nominated, appointed or re-appointed as a judge of the State of New
Columbia Courts unless he or she:
1. has resided and been domiciled in the State of New Columbia for at least 1 year
prior to nomination;
2. is an active member of the unified bar created pursuant to the rules of the State of
New Columbia Court of Appeals and has been active in that bar for at least five
years; and
3. is recommended to the Governor, for such nomination and appointment, by the
State of New Columbia Judicial Nomination Commission.

14

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
b. Judges may not be removed or sanctioned for the good faith legal determinations they
render. A judge of the State of New Columbia Courts shall be removed from office upon
a final judgment of conviction of a crime which is punishable as a felony under federal
law or which would be a felony in the State of New Columbia or a determination,
following a process established by law, of:
1. willful misconduct in office;
2. willful and persistent failure to perform judicial duties;
3. any other conduct which is prejudicial to the administration of justice or which

brings the judicial office into disrepute;
4. failure to maintain residency in the State of New Columbia; or
5. a mental or physical disability (including habitual intemperance) which is or is
likely to become permanent and which prevents, or seriously interferes with, the
proper performance of his or her judicial duties.
Sec. 4. Powers of the State of New Columbia Courts
The Superior Court of the State of New Columbia shall have jurisdiction of any civil
action or other matter at law or in equity brought in the State of New Columbia and of
any criminal case under any law of the State of New Columbia. The State of New
Columbia Court of Appeals shall have jurisdiction of appeals from the Superior Court
and, to the extent provided by law, to review orders and decisions of the Governor, the
House of Delegates, or any agency of the State of New Columbia. The State of New
Columbia Courts shall also have jurisdiction over any other matters granted to the State
of New Columbia Courts by other provisions of law.
Sec. 5. Designation of Chief Judges
The Chief Judge of the State of New Columbia Court of Appeals and the Chief Judge of
the Superior Court for the State of New Columbia shall be designated by the Judicial
Nomination Commission from among the judges of their respective courts in regular
active service, and shall serve as Chief Judge for a term of four years or until a successor
is designated, except that a term as Chief Judge shall not extend beyond the Chief Judge's
term as a judge of a State of New Columbia Courts. A Chief Judge shall be eligible for
re-designation as Chief Judge.

15

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
ARTICLE IV
BUDGET AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
Section
1. Fiscal year
2. Submission of annual budget
3. Adoption of budget by House of Delegates
4. Annual financial statements and audits
5. Balanced budget
6. Delegates’ contract review
7. Emergency and contingency reserve fund
Sec. 1. Fiscal year
The House of Delegates shall establish by Act the fiscal year of the State of New
Columbia.
Sec. 2. Submission of annual budget
a. The Governor shall prepare and submit to the House of Delegates each year, at such time
as the House of Delegates shall direct, and shall make available to the public at such time,
an annual budget for the State of New Columbia government. It shall:
1. (A) Reflect the actual financial condition of the State of New Columbia
government, (B) Specify the agencies and purposes for which funds are being
requested; and (C) Be prepared on the assumption that proposed expenditures for
such fiscal year shall not exceed estimated resources from existing sources and
proposed resources.
2. Be accompanied by: (A) An annual budget message which shall include
supporting financial and statistical information for the forthcoming fiscal year and
information on the approved budgets and expenditures for the immediately
preceding 3 fiscal years; (B) Multiyear operating and capital improvement plans
for all agencies; (C) A summary of the budget for distribution to the general
public.
b. The budget prepared and submitted by the Governor shall include, but not be limited to,
recommended expenditures at a reasonable level for the House of Delegates, the Office of
the Attorney General, the Office of the Chief Financial Officer, and the State Board of
Education.
c. The Governor may prepare and submit to the House of Delegates such supplemental or
deficiency budget proposals as are necessary, including proposals to increase resources to
meet any such increased expenditure, and may prepare and submit to the House of
16

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
Delegates proposed reprogrammings of budgeted amounts. Such proposals shall be
subject to the approval of the House of Delegates by Act or Resolution; provided, the
House of Delegates may by Act designate categories and classes of supplemental and
deficiency budget modifications and reprogrammings for which approval by the House of
Delegates is not required or for which approval of the House will be deemed to have
occurred upon the expiration of a period of time after the Governor submits the proposal
to the House of Delegates.
Sec. 3. Adoption of budget by House of Delegates
The House of Delegates, within 70 calendar days after receipt of the budget proposal
from the Governor, and after a public hearing, shall adopt by Act the annual budget for
the State of New Columbia government. No amount may be obligated or expended by
any officer or employee of the State of New Columbia government unless such amount
has been approved by Act of the House of Delegates, and then only according to such
Act, or as otherwise provided in section 2(c) of this Article.
Sec. 4. Annual financial statement and audits
Within 120 days following the close of the fiscal year, the Governor shall submit to the
House of Delegates a complete and audited financial statement and report for the
preceding fiscal year.
Sec. 5. Balanced budget
a. The House of Delegates shall not approve any budget which would result in expenditures
being in excess of all resources which the Governor estimates will be available from all
funds available to the State of New Columbia for such fiscal year.
b. The Governor shall not forward to the House of Delegates a budget which is not
balanced. The budget shall identify any new sources of revenue which shall be required
in order to balance the budget as submitted.
Sec. 6. Review of Contracts by the House of Delegates
By Act, the House of Delegates may establish which contracts shall be subject to its
review prior to the contract going into effect; provided, the scope of contracts subject to
the review of the House of Delegates shall not exceed those contracts that were subject to
approval of the Council of the District of Columbia under the Home Rule Act, and the
procedures and timelines for such review and approval may be no more restrictive or
lengthy than the procedures and timelines provided for in the Home Rule Act.
17

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
Sec. 7. Emergency and contingency reserve funds
a. (1) The Governor shall deposit into an emergency cash reserve fund not later than the
first day of each fiscal year such an amount as may be required to maintain a balance in
the fund of at least 2 percent of the operating expenditures of the government of the State
of New Columbia; provided, if the Governor uses money from the fund during a fiscal
year, the State of New Columbia shall appropriate sufficient funds each fiscal year in the
budget process to replenish any amounts allocated from the emergency reserve fund
during the preceding fiscal years so that not less than 50 percent of any amount allocated
in the preceding fiscal year or the amount necessary to restore the emergency reserve
fund to the 2 percent required balance, whichever is less, is replenished by the end of the
first fiscal year following each such allocation and 100 percent of the amount allocated or
the amount necessary to restore the emergency reserve fund to the 2 percent required
balance, whichever is less, is replenished by the end of the second fiscal year following
each such allocation; provided further, if an amount is allocated from the emergency cash
reserve fund for cash flow management purposes, the Governor shall fully replenish the
fund in the amount allocated not later than the earlier of the expiration of the 9-month
period which begins on the date the allocation is made or the last day of the fiscal year.
(2) The Governor may use the emergency cash reserve fund to provide for unanticipated
and nonrecurring extraordinary needs of an emergency nature, including a natural disaster
or calamity or a state of emergency as declared by the Governor, for unexpected
obligations of federal law and for cash flow management purposes in an amount of not
more than 50 percent of the balance of the fund.
b. (1) The Governor shall deposit into a contingency cash reserve fund not later than the
first day of each fiscal year such amount as may be required to maintain a balance in the
fund of at least 4 percent of the operating expenditures of the government of the State of
New Columbia; provided, the government of the State of New Columbia shall
appropriate sufficient funds each fiscal year in the budget process to replenish any
amounts allocated from the contingency reserve fund during the preceding fiscal years so
that not less than 50 percent of any amount allocated in the preceding fiscal year or the
amount necessary to restore the contingency reserve fund to the 4 percent required
balance, whichever is less, is replenished by the end of the first fiscal year following each
such allocation and 100 percent of the amount allocated or the amount necessary to
restore the contingency reserve fund to the 4 percent required balance, whichever is less,
is replenished by the end of the second fiscal year following each such allocation;
provided further, if an amount is allocated from the contingency cash reserve fund for
cash flow management purposes, the Governor shall fully replenish the fund in the
amount allocated not later than the earlier of the expiration of the 9-month period which
begins on the date the allocation is made or the last day of the fiscal year.
18

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
(2) The Governor may use the contingency cash reserve fund to provide for nonrecurring
or unforeseen needs that arise during the fiscal year, including expenses associated with
unforeseen weather or other natural disasters, unexpected obligations created by federal
law or new public safety, health, welfare, or education needs or requirements that have
been identified after the budget process has occurred, for opportunities to achieve cost
savings, to cover revenue shortfalls experienced by the District government for 3
consecutive months (based on a 2 month rolling average) that are 5 percent or more
below the budget forecast, and for cash flow management purposes in an amount of not
more than 50 percent of the balance of the fund.

ARTICLE V
BORROWING
Section
1. Authority to issue and redeem general obligation bonds for capital projects
2. Contents of borrowing legislation and elections on issuing general obligation bonds
3. Issuance of general obligation bonds
4. Borrowing to meet appropriations and in anticipation of revenues
5. Special tax
6. Full faith and credit of State of New Columbia pledged
7. Payment of the general obligation bonds and notes
8. Revenue bonds and other obligations
9. Limitations on borrowing and spending
Sec. 1. Authority to issue and redeem general obligation bonds for capital projects
a. The State of New Columbia may incur indebtedness by issuing general obligation bonds
to refund indebtedness of the State of New Columbia at any time outstanding and to
provide for the payment of the cost of acquiring or undertaking capital projects, including
paying its share of regional transportation projects. Such bonds shall bear interest,
payable on such dates, at such rate or rates and at such maturities as the Governor, subject
to the provisions of section 2, may determine to be necessary to make such bonds
marketable.
b. The State of New Columbia may reserve the right to redeem any or all of its obligations
before maturity in such manner and at such price as may be fixed by the Governor prior
to the issuance of such obligations.

19

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
Sec. 2. Contents of borrowing legislation and elections on issuing general obligation bonds
The House of Delegates may by Act authorize the issuance of general obligation bonds
for the purposes specified in section 1. Such an Act shall contain, at least, provisions:
briefly describing each project to be financed by the Act; identifying the Act authorizing
each such project or category of projects; setting forth the maximum amount of debt
principal which may be incurred for the projects; setting forth the maximum rate of
interest to be paid on such indebtedness; and setting forth the maximum allowable
maturity for the issue and the maximum debt service payable in any year.
Sec. 3. Issuance of general obligation bonds
a. After an Act of the House of Delegates authorizing the issuance of general obligation
bonds has taken effect, the Governor may issue such general obligation bonds. An issue
of general obligation bonds may be all or any part of the aggregate principal amount of
bonds authorized by such Act.
b. The principal amount of the general obligation bonds of each issue shall be payable in
annual installments beginning not more than 3 years after the date of such bonds and
ending not more than 30 years after such date.
c. The limitation period for suits regarding these general obligation bonds shall be no
greater than 30 days and shall be provided for more specifically by Act.
Sec. 4. Borrowing to meet appropriations and in anticipation of revenues
a. In the absence of unappropriated revenues available to meet appropriations, the House of
Delegates may by Act authorize the issuance of general obligation notes.
b. In anticipation of the collection or receipt of revenues for a fiscal year, the House of
Delegates may by Act authorize the issuance of revenue anticipation notes.
c. The total amount of any general obligation notes originally issued during a fiscal year
shall not exceed two percent of the total appropriations for the State of New Columbia for
such fiscal year, and the total amount of all revenue anticipation notes outstanding at any
time during a fiscal year shall not exceed 20 percent of the total anticipated revenue of
the State of New Columbia for such fiscal year.
d. Any general obligation note issued under subsection (a) of this section, or any revenue
anticipation note issued under subsection (b) of this section, as authorized by an Act of
the House of Delegates, may be renewed. Any such note, including any renewal of such
note, shall be due and payable not later than the last day of the fiscal year occurring
immediately after the fiscal year during which the Act authorizing the original issuance
of such note takes effect.
20

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
Sec. 5. Special tax
Any Act of the House of Delegates authorizing the issuance of general obligation bonds
shall provide for the annual levy of a special tax or charge, if necessary. Such tax or
charge shall be levied, without limitation as to rate or amount, in amounts which together
with other State of New Columbia revenues available and applicable will be sufficient to
pay the principal of and interest on such general obligation bonds as they become due and
payable.
Sec. 6. Full faith and credit of State of New Columbia pledged
The full faith and credit of the State of New Columbia is pledged for the payment of the
principal of and interest on any general obligation bond or note issued under this Article,
whether or not such pledge is stated in such bond or note or in the act authorizing the
issuance of such bond or note.
Sec. 7. Payment of the general obligation bonds and notes
a. In each annual budget, the House of Delegates shall provide sufficient funds to pay the
principal of and interest on all general obligation bonds or notes due and payable during
such fiscal year.
b. The Governor shall insure that the principal and interest on all general obligation bonds
and notes issued under this Article are paid when due, including by paying such principal
and interest from funds not otherwise legally committed.
Sec. 8. Revenue bonds and other obligations
a. (1) The House of Delegates may by Act or Resolution authorize the issuance of revenue
bonds, notes, or other obligations (including refunding bonds, notes, or other obligations)
to borrow money to finance, or assist in the financing or refinancing of undertakings in
the areas of: housing; health; transit; utilities; preschool, primary, secondary, vocational,
adult, rehabilitative, re-entry, and higher education; educational loans; facilities for
culture, sports, mass commuting, sewage disposal, solid waste disposal, recycling or
reuse, hazardous waste disposal, or local district heating or cooling; or the local
furnishing of energy or water; manufacturing, and any other undertaking that the House
of Delegates determines to be for a public purpose. Any such financing or refinancing
may be effected by loans made directly or indirectly to any individual or legal entity, by
the purchase of any mortgage, note, or other security, or by the purchase, lease, or sale of
any property.
21

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
(2) Any revenue bond, note, or other obligation issued under paragraph (1) of this
subsection shall be a special obligation of the State of New Columbia and shall be
a negotiable instrument.
(3) Any revenue bond, note or other obligation issued under paragraph (1) of this
subsection shall be paid and secured (as to principal, interest, and any premium)
as provided by the Act or Resolution of the House of Delegates authorizing the
issuance of such bond, note, or other obligation. Any act of the House of
Delegates authorizing the issuance of such bond, note, or other obligation, or any
delegation of such authority, may provide for: (A) The payment of such bond,
note, or other obligation from any available revenues, assets, or property; and (B)
The securing of such bond, note, or other obligation by the mortgage of real
property or the creation of any security interest in available revenues, assets, or
other property.
(4) (A) In authorizing the issuance of any revenue bond, note, or other obligation
under paragraph (1) of this subsection, the House of Delegates may enter into or
authorize the Governor to enter into any agreement concerning the acquisition,
use, or disposition of any funds or property. Any such agreement may create any
security interest in any funds or property; may provide for the custody, collection,
security, investment, and payment of any funds (including any funds held in trust)
for the payment of such bond, note, or other obligation; may mortgage any
property; may provide for the acquisition, construction, maintenance, and
disposition of the undertaking financed or refinanced using the proceeds of such
bond, note, or other obligation; and may provide for the doing of any act (or the
refraining from doing any act) which the State of New Columbia has the right to
do in the absence of such agreement. Any such agreement may be assigned for the
benefit of, or made a part of any contract with, any holder of such revenue bond,
note, or other obligation issued under paragraph (1) of this subsection. (B) Any
security interest created under subparagraph (A) of this paragraph shall be valid,
binding, and perfected from the time such security interest is created, with or
without the physical delivery of any funds or any other property and with or
without any further action. Such security interest shall be valid, binding, and
perfected whether or not any statement, document, or instrument relating to such
security interest is recorded or filed. The lien created by such security interest is
valid, binding, and perfected with respect to any individual or legal entity having
claims against the State of New Columbia, whether or not such individual or legal
entity has notice of such lien. (C) Any funds of the State of New Columbia held
for the payment or security of any revenue bond, note, or other obligation issued
under paragraph (1) of this subsection, whether or not such funds are held in trust,
may be secured in the manner agreed to by the State of New Columbia and any
22

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
depository of such funds. Any depository of such funds may give security for the
deposit of such funds.
b. Any and all such bonds, notes, or other obligations shall not be general obligations of the
State of New Columbia and shall not be a pledge of or involve the faith and credit or the
taxing power of the State of New Columbia, shall not constitute a debt of the State of
New Columbia, and shall not constitute lending of the public credit for private
undertakings.
c. Any and all such bonds, notes, or other obligations shall be issued pursuant to an Act or
Resolution of the House of Delegates without the necessity of submitting the question of
such issuance to the registered qualified voters of the State of New Columbia for
approval or disapproval.
d. Any Act or Resolution of the House of Delegates authorizing the issuance of revenue
bonds, notes, or other obligations under paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of this section
may:
(1) Briefly describe the purpose for which such bonds, notes, or other
obligations are to be issued; (2) Identify the Act authorizing such
purpose; (3) Prescribe the form, terms, provisions, manner and method
of issuing and selling (including sale by negotiation or by competitive
bid) such bonds, notes, or other obligations; (4) Provide for the rights
and remedies of the holders of such bonds, notes, or other obligations
upon default; (5) Prescribe any other details with respect to the issuance,
sale, or securing of such bonds, notes, or other obligations; and (6)
Authorize the Governor to take any actions in connection with the
issuance, sale, delivery, security, and payment of such notes, bonds, or
other obligations, including the prescribing of any terms or conditions
not contained in such Act or Resolution of the House of Delegates.
e. (1) The House of Delegates may by Act delegate to any department of the executive
branch the authority of the House of Delegates under subsection (a) of this section to
issue revenue bonds, notes, and other obligations to borrow money for the purposes
described in subsection (a) of this section..
Sec. 9. Limitations on borrowing and spending
a. No general obligation bonds (other than bonds to refund outstanding indebtedness) shall
be issued during any fiscal year in an amount which would cause the amount of principal
and interest required to be paid both serially and into a sinking fund in any fiscal year on
the aggregate amounts of all outstanding general obligation bonds and such Treasury
loans, to exceed 17% of the State of New Columbia revenues (less any fees or revenues
23

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
directed to servicing revenue bonds, any revenues, charges, or fees dedicated for the
purposes of water and sewer facilities ((including fees or revenues directed to servicing
or securing revenue bonds issued for such purposes)), retirement contributions, revenues
from retirement systems, and revenues derived from the sale of general obligation or
revenue bonds) which the Governor estimates, and the Chief Financial Officer certifies,
will be credited to the State of New Columbia during the fiscal year in which the bonds
will be issued.
b. The 17% limitation specified in this subsection shall be calculated in a manner provided
by Act of the House of Delegates.

ARTICLE VI
INITIATIVE; REFERENDUM; RECALL
Section
1. Definitions; computation
2. Process
3. Submission of measure at election
4. Rejection of measure
5. Approval of measure
6. Short title and summary
7. Recall process
8. Time limits on initiation of process
9. When official removed; filling of vacancies
Sec. 1. Definitions; computation
a. The term "initiative" means the process by which the citizens may propose laws (except
laws appropriating funds or authorizing discrimination) and present such proposed laws
directly to the voters of the State of New Columbia for their approval or disapproval.
b. The term "referendum" means the process by which the voters of the State of New
Columbia may repeal acts of the House of Delegates. This provision shall not apply to
emergency acts, acts levying taxes, acts appropriating funds, or advisory referenda.
c. The term "recall" means the process by which the voters of the State of New Columbia
may call for the holding of an election to remove or retain an elected official prior to the
expiration of his or her term.

24

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
d. The latest official count of registered voters by the State of New Columbia elections
agency, which was issued 30 or more days prior to submission of the signatures for any
particular initiative, referendum, or recall petition, shall be used for computing the
signature requirements of this Article.
Sec. 2. Process
An initiative or referendum may be proposed by the presentation to the elections agency
of a petition containing the signatures of 5 percent of the registered voters in the State of
New Columbia; provided that the total signatures submitted include 5 percent of the
registered voters in each of 5 or more of the legislative districts.
Sec. 3. Submission of measure at election
a. The elections agency shall submit an initiative measure without alteration at the next
general, special, or primary election held at least 90 days after the measure is received.
b. The elections agency shall hold an election on a referendum measure or a recall petition
within 114 days of its receipt of a petition. If a previously scheduled general, primary, or
special election will occur between 54 and 114 days of its receipt of a referendum or
recall petition, the elections agency may present the referendum at that election.
Sec. 4. Rejection of measure
If a majority of the registered voters who vote in a referendum vote to disapprove the
referred Act, such action shall be deemed a repeal of the Act or that portion of the Act on
the referendum ballot. No action may be taken by the House of Delegates to advance the
matter presented for 365 days following the date of the elections agency’s certification of
the vote.
Sec. 5. Approval of measure
If a majority of the registered voters who vote adopt legislation by initiative, then the
adopted initiative shall become law upon the certification of the vote by the elections
agency.
Sec. 6. Short title and summary
The elections agency may propose a short title and summary of the initiative and
referendum matter, which shall accurately reflect the intent and meaning of the proposed
referendum or initiative.
25

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
Sec. 7. Recall process
Any elected official of the State of New Columbia government may be recalled by the
registered voters of the legislative district from which he or she was elected or by the
registered voters of the State of New Columbia at large in the case of an At-Large elected
official. A recall may be proposed by the filing with the elections agency of a petition
demanding the recall of the elected official, signed by 10 percent of the registered voters
in the elected official’s legislative district or, if the elected official is elected at-large,
signed by 10 percent of the registered voters in the State of New Columbia, including at
least 10 percent of the registered voters in each of 5 or more of the legislative districts.
Sec. 8. Time limits on initiation of process
The process of recalling an elected official may not be initiated within 1 year after a
recall election has been determined in favor of the same elected official, unless the
petition describes and the elections agency is satisfied that there exist compelling new
facts that have emerged warranting consideration of a new recall petition within that year.
Sec. 9. When official removed; filling of vacancies
When a majority of qualified voters votes to remove an elected official from office, that
person shall be removed immediately upon certification of the results of the vote. The
vacancy created by such recall shall be filled in the same manner as other vacancies in the
office.
ARTICLE VII
MISCELLANEOUS
Section
1. Openness and transparency
2. Construction of Constitution
3. Constitution amending procedure
4. Effective date
Sec. 1. Openness and transparency
The government of the State of New Columbia shall operate on principles of openness,
transparency and democratic participation. Specific obligations regarding participation
and transparency may be established by Act of the House of Delegates and administrative
orders of the Governor.
26

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
Sec. 2. Construction of Constitution
To the extent that any provisions of this Constitution are inconsistent with the provisions
of any other laws of the State of New Columbia, the provisions of this Constitution shall
prevail and shall be deemed to supersede the provisions of such laws.
Sec. 3. Constitution amending procedure
a. The Constitution may be amended by an Act passed by the affirmative vote of a majority
of the members of the House of Delegates and ratified by a majority of the qualified
voters who vote in a ratification referendum.
b. Ratified constitutional amendments take effect either on the date the elections agency
certifies the ratification, or the date prescribed by the amendment, whichever is later.
Sec. 4. Effective date
This Constitution shall take effect upon affirmative vote by the United States Congress to
admit New Columbia as a state of the United States of America with the same rights as
other states.
ARTICLE VIII
TRANSFER OF OFFICES
Section
1. Transfer of offices
2. Continuation of State of New Columbia court system
3. Pending actions and proceedings
4. Laws in force and prior powers
5. Personnel rights
6. Debts; assets; records
7. Residency and qualifications
8. Adjustments
9. Voting rights
Sec. 1. Transfer of offices
The Council of the District of Columbia and the offices of Chairman of the Council and
Mayor are abolished as of the effective date of this Constitution.

27

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
a. To provide continuity during the transition from the government of the District of
Columbia to the State of New Columbia, the members of the Council, the Chairman of
the Council, the Mayor, the Attorney General, members of the State Board of Education
and Advisory Neighborhood Commissioners in office as of the effective date of this
Constitution shall be deemed members of the House of Delegates, Speaker of the House
of Delegates, Governor, Attorney General, and members of the State Board of Education
respectively, until the expiration of the term of office each such individual held
immediately prior to the effective date of this Constitution. Vacancies in these offices
occurring during the holdover term shall be filled as provided in Articles I, II, and IV.
b. New members of the House of Delegates shall be elected on the same schedule as

existing Councilmembers of the District of Columbia.
c. Positions previously held on boards, commissions, and regional bodies by members of
the Council of the District of Columbia, the Chairman of the Council, or the Mayor shall
be held after the effective date of this Constitution by members of the House of
Delegates, the Speaker of the House of Delegates, and the Governor, respectively, to the
extent not inconsistent with this Constitution.
d. For boards and commissions, members not federally appointed and in office as of the
effective date of this Constitution shall continue to serve until the expiration of that term
of office held on the effective date of this Constitution.
e. The terms of federally appointed members to any District of Columbia board or
commission shall expire as of the effective date of this Constitution and no vacancies
shall be deemed to be created by the abolition of these positions unless the Governor or
House of Delegates creates a new position on the board or commission.
f.

The individual serving as Chief Financial Officer as of the effective date of this
Constitution shall be deemed to have been appointed as Chief Financial Officer under
Article II, for a term to expire on July 1 of the year in which his or her previously extant
term would have expired.

Sec. 2. Continuation of State of New Columbia court system
a. To provide continuity during the transition from the government of the District of
Columbia and the State of New Columbia, the members of the District of Columbia
Superior Court and the Court of Appeals of the District of Columbia appointed as of the
effective date of this Constitution shall be deemed members of the State of New
Columbia Superior Court and the Court of Appeals of the State of New Columbia,
28

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
respectively, until the expiration of that term of office held immediately prior to the
effective date of this Constitution.
b. The District of Columbia Court of Appeals, the Superior Court of the District of
Columbia, the Judicial Nomination Commission, and the Commission on Judicial
Disability and Tenure shall continue subject to the provisions of Article III of this
Constitution; provided, by Act, the House of Delegates may modify or reallocate the
functions of the District of Columbia Commission on Judicial Disabilities and Tenure.
c. The term and qualifications of any judge of any District of Columbia court appointed
prior to the effective date of this Constitution shall not be affected by the provisions of
Article III of this Constitution. No provision of this Constitution shall be construed to
extend the term of any such judge. Judges of the State of New Columbia courts appointed
after the effective date of this Constitution shall be appointed according to Article III.
d. Nothing in this Constitution shall be construed to amend, repeal, or diminish the duties,
rights, privileges, or benefits accruing under sections 1561 through 1571 of title 11 of the
District of Columbia Code, dealing with retirement, or to authorize a decrease in the level
of compensation of the judges of the District of Columbia courts as of the effective date
of this Constitution. The compensation received by judges of the State of New Columbia
courts shall not be diminished during their continuance in office.
Sec. 3. Pending actions and proceedings
All existing writs, actions, suits, judicial and administrative proceedings, civil or criminal
liabilities, prosecutions, judgments, sentences, orders, decrees, appeals, causes of action,
contracts, claims, demands, titles, and rights shall continue unaffected except as may be
modified in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. The State of New
Columbia shall be the legal successor to the District of Columbia in all matters.
Sec. 4. Laws in force and prior powers
a. Acts of the Council of the District of Columbia preceding the Constitution of this House
of Delegates shall be considered valid as if they were enacted by the House of Delegates.
b. Upon the effective date of this Constitution, all of the laws then in force in the District of
Columbia, including regulations and Mayor’s Orders, shall continue in force and effect
throughout the State of New Columbia, except as modified by the State of New Columbia
Admission Act, or by this Constitution, or as thereafter modified in accordance with this
Constitution.

29

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
c. All powers previously vested in the Council of the District of Columbia by Congress
through the District of Columbia Home Rule Act, to the extent not inconsistent with
Constitution and to the extent not thereafter having been transferred or repealed, shall be
vested in the House of Delegates in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.
d. Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, all functions previously granted to or
vested in the Mayor of the District of Columbia, through the District of Columbia Home
Rule Act, and to the extent not thereafter having been transferred or repealed, shall be
vested in the Governor in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.

e. The annual compensation of the Governor on the effective date of this Constitution shall
be the annual compensation provided to the Mayor of the District of Columbia
immediately prior to the effective date of this Constitution.
Sec. 5. Personnel rights
Nothing in this Constitution shall be construed as affecting the rights under District of
Columbia law of employees of the State of New Columbia who were employed by the
District of Columbia government prior to the effective date of this Constitution to
personnel benefits, including, but not limited to pay, tenure, leave, retirement, health and
life insurance, and employee disability and death benefits, or regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, and applicable to such officers and employees immediately prior to the
effective date of this Constitution, provided, all such benefits shall thereafter be subject to
modification by Act or regulation.
Sec. 6. Debts; assets; records
The debts and liabilities of the District of Columbia as of the effective date of this
Constitution shall be assumed by the State of New Columbia, and debts owed to the
District of Columbia shall be collected by the State of New Columbia. Assets and
records of the District of Columbia shall become the property of the State of New
Columbia.
Sec. 7. Residency and qualifications
Residence, voter registration, or other qualifications under the District of Columbia may
be used towards the fulfillment of corresponding qualifications required by this
Constitution.

30

III. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW COLUMBIA
DISCUSSION DRAFT
Sec. 8. Adjustments
The Governor is authorized and empowered to enter into an agreement or agreements
concerning the manner and method by which amounts owed by the State of New
Columbia to the United States or by the United States to the State of New Columbia,
shall be ascertained and paid.
Sec. 9. Voting rights
Any person who resides in any area which was a part of the District of Columbia
immediately prior to the admission of the State of New Columbia but which is not
included in the State of New Columbia may, at his or her option, be deemed to be a
resident of the State of New Columbia for purposes of voting in a State of New Columbia
election, unless that person claims residency in another state for voting purposes.

31

